Stocks rose in Asia, spurred by Chinese technology shares, while US and European equity futures were mixed in disjointed trading. An Asia-Pacific share gauge added a little under 1% and European contracts pushed higher but US futures dipped. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Tech Index advanced after new video game approvals encouraged the view that China is loosening a crackdown on internet firms. Still, the tech index and the broader Asian market came off session highs, suggesting some investors took the opportunity to bank profits. Treasury yields edged up, taking the benchmark 10-year rate back to 3%. The yen slid to another two-decade low versus the dollar on the policy contrast between a super-dovish Bank of Japan and hawkish Federal Reserve.  Sentiment remains fragile on concerns that interest rates will need to go much higher to rein in inflation, stifling economic growth in the process. India, for instance, hiked borrowing costs for a second month. The Bloomberg Commodity Spot Index is at a record peak, underlining global price pressures. “There seems to be across all of the investing segments a lack of strong conviction in the direction of the market,” Kate Moore, head of thematic strategy for global allocation at BlackRock Inc., said on Bloomberg Television. “We are going to see a lot more investors remain on the sidelines, remain cautiously positioned.” The World Bank again cut its forecast for 2022 global expansion, warning of several years of above-average inflation and below-average growth. “When you look at the global growth backdrop, it’s certainly slowing and it’s slowing from very high levels and it’s going to feel uncomfortable,” Erin Browne, Pacific Investment Management Co. multi-asset strategies portfolio manager, said on Bloomberg Radio. Billionaire hedge fund founder Ray Dalio said central banks across the globe will be required to cut interest rates in 2024 after a period of stagflation constrains their economies, according to a report. Cryptocurrencies were on the back foot, with Bitcoin shedding about 2.5% and falling back to around $30,500. Key events to watch this week: Some of the main moves in markets: