Multi-retailer and logistics platform OneCart has reported a significant increase of over 200% in its gross merchandise value (GMV). The growth comes after African retail and wholesale group Massmart acquired 87.5% of its issued shares in 2021. The entities confirmed in a statement issued on Tuesday that OneCart plans to double the number of Massmart stores that are available on the app by December. This includes the addition of the Makro Crown Mines, Carnival and Wonderboom stores in June while selected Builders stores will be added in July. “We are really pleased to be able to leverage OneCart for mutual benefit at Massmart through this expansion, given the high priority that Massmart has placed on on-demand eCommerce at Game, Makro and Builders,” says Lynton Peters, OneCart’s founder and chief executive officer. OneCart, which allows customers to shop over 20 product categories from up to 12 retailers, currently offers customers access to 28 Game and 12 Makro stores. According to the logistics platform, once orders are complete, they are delivered within one hour or during a specified time slot chosen by the customer. Acknowledging OneCart’s vision to represent every retailer within a 10km radius of all their customers, Peters says the platform continues to focus on increasing the number of products and retailers available on the app. “Not only does the platform act as an alternative customer channel for some of the country’s most established brands, it is also the first direct-to-customer channel for smaller, emerging retailers and SMEs entering the online market,” he adds. Peters says customers enjoy the optionality that comes from using a multi-retailer platform that serves as a one-stop-shop, without the hassle of having to download multiple stand-alone applications. “A typical OneCart order could easily involve a diverse product selection that includes your weekly or monthly groceries, a case of wine or beer, a new drill for that spontaneous DIY project, beauty products, and nappies and baby food.” Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.