“If there is one specific request or plea that I would have uttered when I was a youngster – it would have been: ‘Help raise and create in us a money-savvy youth, South Africa.’ The concept of money is a fundamental skill that any adult, parent, guardian, family member or teacher can help teach and offer our young ones. It does not only offer a victorious situation for the youth and their future financial decision-making, but it is also a win for South Africa’s economy and prosperity,” highlights Carla Oberholzer (debt advisor at DebtSafe) Oberholzer encourages adults to help raise a generation of money-savvy young people, and the key is to ‘catch them young’. By starting early, adults can help the youth acquire the knowledge, practical skills, and confidence to make informed financial future decisions. Now is a good a time as any to start with the empowerment process – grown-ups need to start talking to kids about money, make the money concept tangible and help the youth to become financially literate. DebtSafe’s team has compiled an age-by-age guide that offers grown-ups (including younger adults) ideas on what to include in their financial youth-based teachings: TODDLERS (2-3 Years) – Creative, educational learning & ‘make pretend’… Parents/Guardians/Teachers can incorporate money-savvy, creative learning & ‘make pretend’ fun, straightforward ways to introduce the concept of money/finance to TODDLERS (2 to 3-year-olds). Here are a few suggestions for them to consider: PRESCHOOLERS (3-5 Years) – Imaginary play & chore-related (allowance/pocket money) activities… Adults are encouraged to allow PRESCHOOLERS (3 to 5-year-olds) to take part in money-savvy educational teachings & activities: By incorporating the above examples, preschoolers can start grasping the ‘money concept’ & attain a basic understanding that there are ‘bills’ to pay. GRADESCHOOLERS (6-12 Years) – Comparison teachings & introducing ‘money tools’… There are various things that parents/guardians can do to up GRADESCHOOLERS’ (6 to 12-year-olds) money awareness and skills, for example: TEENAGERS (12-18 Years) – The value of budgeting & the gift of giving… Believe it or not, parents can teach TEENAGERS (12 to 18-year-olds) a few ‘financial ropes’ to help them become money-savvy stewards. Here are a few considerations: YOUNG ADULTS (18-30 years) – Various disciplines can set a Young Adult up for a financial freedom win… DebtSafe wants to encourage South African young adults to continue with money-savvy ways whether they have been taught money principles from a young age or not. Here are a few things for them to consider: Money plays an essential role in each individual’s life. And it, therefore, also deserves a substantial amount of attention starting from a young and youthful age. Learning how to save, budget and take accountability for their debt are masteries that the youth should incorporate and learn early in life. Money teachings will set young people up to experience the gift of financial freedom. DebtSafe commemorates adults such as parents, guardians and teachers with this unavoidable, imperative task. Carla Oberholzer is debt advisor at DebtSafe.