The recovery of Eskom’s generation systems is off to a slow start as, according to the power utility’s statement on Wednesday, many of its workers remain absent from their essential duties. This is despite Tuesday’s joint call by unions for workers to return to work on the promise that wage negotiations will continue on Friday 1 July. On Wednesday morning Eskom’s spokesperson Sikonathi Mantshantsha confirmed in a note to the media that employees had returned to work to fulfil the essential service of keeping the country’s lights on. However, it seems the utility might have spoken too soon, as later in the day it released an alert that stage 6 load shedding will begin from 16:00 t0 22:00 on the day, due to the staggered return of employees. Eskom says Stage 4 will be implemented from 22:00 – 00:00 on Wednesday, then Stage 2 until 05:00 on Thursday morning. From 05:00 until 00:00 on Thursday load shedding will be implemented at Stage 4. Stage 2 load shedding will be implemented from midnight until 05:00 on Friday morning. “While some workers have started reporting for duty at the power stations, there is still a high level of absenteeism. As a result of the unlawful strike, routine maintenance work has had to be postponed.” “This backlog will take days to weeks to clear. It is therefore important to note that the system will remain constrained and vulnerable to additional breakdowns while recovery activities are in progress,” Eskom says. Systems remain constrained According to Eskom, 3 161 megawatts (MW) of generation capacity is currently offline on planned maintenance, while a further 17 395MW is lost due to systems breakdowns. “Due to the unlawful and unprotected labour action, which has caused widespread disruption to Eskom’s power plants, Eskom is unable to return some generators to service,” Eskom notes. “This has compelled Eskom to continue taking precautionary measures to conserve emergency generation capacity and safeguard plant from damage.” “There remains a risk that the stage of load shedding may have to change at any time, depending on the state of the plant,” the utility says. Read:
Eskom confirms no protest action at power stations, workers report for duty
Gordhan hopes all Eskom staff will return to work, as wage negotiations resume Wage negotiations The employee stay-away observed from Wednesday 22 June came after Eskom management walked out of wage negotiation talks with Solidarity, the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) and the National Union of Metalworkers South Africa (Numsa) at the central bargaining forum (CBF). The utility’s decision to return to the negotiating table with unions is the reason why some employees are making their way back to work. Although it is still unclear how much Eskom will be offering workers, the parties are set to resume talks on 1 July, where hopefully an agreement will be reached. “The details of any wage offer will be made known on Friday when the wage negotiations resume,” Mantshantsha says. Read: Eskom walks out of wage negotiation with union Fuelling speculation Speaking at a media briefing on held Tuesday evening Minister of Public Enterprises Pravin Gordhan noted that the implementation of Stage 6 load shedding was necessitated by the fact that the majority of Eskom employees – about 90% the minister estimated – failed to report to work on Tuesday as a result of intimidatory tactics displayed by disgruntled fellow employees. During the media briefing Gordhan took some time to speculate on the motive behind the alleged intimidation by some Eskom workers over the past week. “The question the country needs to ask is of those [who] inspire this kind of activity, in whose interest is this? Because electricity is crucial to every household; electricity is crucial to the economy of this country. It’s crucial to ensuring that jobs are retained by businesses, and it is important for investors that we have some certainty about the electricity situation,” Gordhan said. “…but also, the ability to ensure that we continue to grow as an economy and continue to provide households with the electricity they require and importantly industry with the electricity it requires,” the minister added. “[If] these short-term interests are inspired either by wage negotiations or for some other reasons, which I leave you to speculate, it is causing a huge amount of damage to South Africa’s reputation.” Talks of sabotage at the power utility are not new, in fact it has been a common topic of discussion for Eskom whenever it holds media briefings or gives routine updates to the country on its state. In May, the power utility opened a case of sabotage with the South African Police Services after a suspected incident at the Tutuka power station. Earlier this year, Moneyweb reported that since 1 April 2021, the utility had recorded 2 752 incidents of theft and vandalism, costing the cash-strapped utility around R200 million. Read:
Eskom reports sabotage at power station to police
Broke Eskom has to cough up to fight theft, vandalism
Hawks to investigate possible sabotage of SA’s power network