The Takealot Group, comprising Takealot.com, Superbalist and Mr D Food, is now 81% of the size of Massmart’s Game when comparing revenue only. In the year to the end of March, Takealot reported revenue of $827 million, which equates to R12.3 billion at the average exchange rate of those 12 months. By contrast, Game reported 52-week sales to the end of December of R15.3 billion. These comparisons are not strictly apples-to-apples as Takealot’s revenue includes all first-party sales through its Takealot.com website, its commission on marketplace sales on the platform, those through Superbalist as well as all commission revenue earned on Mr D Food (which will likely be somewhere in the single digit percentage of billings range, net of course). Game’s figure is a sales-through-the-tills figure, of which the vast majority is actual sales of products. But that Takealot was half the size of Game on a revenue basis last year shows how rapidly the former has grown, and the latter, well, hasn’t. Read: Massmart doubles down on everything but horror-show Game Massmart’s Game is the most obvious overall comparison as it remains one of the largest general merchandise retailers in South Africa. Sales were down 8.7% year on year. Notably, Game reported a trading loss of R1.031 billion, equal to a trading loss margin of 6.7%. Takealot competes head on with both Game and Makro in categories such as televisions, appliances, consumer electronics, and textiles. The Takealot group has grown revenue by 25% in rand terms over the last year (Naspers reports in US dollars). Naspers says Takealot.com grew revenue by 29% in the year. Gross merchandise value … But far more impressive is the growth of gross merchandise value (GMV) across the group. In 2022, this is up by 46% to $1.493 billion – or R22.28 billion. This is one-and-a-half times (146%) the sales of Game last year. Naspers does not split out the breakdown per segment within Takealot, but Takealot.com’s GMV growth was 27% in FY2022. Superbalist – which Naspers now owns 100% of following a complex transaction with subsidiary Media24, which used to own 51% – grew GMV by 42% from FY2021. Mr D Food was the star performer in GMV growth, with an increase of 51% year on year. However, in this business Takealot will ‘only’ earn a commission or fee on each takeaway delivery. Swings and roundabouts The group is still reporting losses, with a loss of about R104 million ($7 million) equivalent to a 1% trading loss margin. This loss margin is similar to its blockbuster lockdown year in FY2021. So-called ‘adjusted’ Ebitda (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation) has close to doubled from $8 million (R130 million) in FY2021 to $15 million (R224 million) in FY2022. Again, it doesn’t provide specific breakdowns but it does say that Superbalist “improved its trading loss margin by almost 2 percentage points to 7% during the year”. This means Superbalist is still losing R7 on every R100 in sales. Given this information (that Superbalist is still firmly loss-making), one could construct a scenario where Mr D Food is unprofitable on an outright basis, but that Takealot.com is. Much depends on where the delivery costs are being accounted for, given the dependence Takealot.com has on the Mr D Food delivery network to handle its last mile. Because the group’s overall trading loss is 1%, it means that Takealot.com and Mr D Food together offset the Superbalist loss (7% trading loss margin) by some distance. Read: Pick n Pay ups on-demand grocery delivery ante with Takealot deal The group says Takealot.com’s marketplace, or third-party sales from resellers, “continued to outpace first-party sales and accounted for 52% of GMV. This means more than R500 of every R1 000 in sales on Takealot.com is for third-party products. This is likely significantly more profitable for the retailer as it carries no risk in holding stock. Last year, it was estimated that 65% of Amazon’s $600 billion in worldwide GMV was from its Marketplace, or sales from third parties using its platform for fulfilment and delivery. Naspers says in the last financial year “there were 5 899 active sellers [on the Takealot platform], up from 310 sellers seven years ago”. Amazon is reported to be entering the South African market in early 2023. Naspers says “the pandemic has accelerated the longer-term momentum behind ecommerce in South Africa and there is still much room for further growth”. It adds: “According to Euromonitor, the total ecommerce market is projected to reach some R98.6bn by 2024 and ecommerce penetration (including grocery) is forecast to reach 6.4% by 2023. “This is well below many other countries – from China to Brazil – and it highlights the vast potential for South Africa and for Takealot”.