The Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA), in a judgment handed down on 14 June, found that Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma acted unconstitutionally in banning the sale of tobacco products during the Covid-19 lockdown. The minister had appealed the December 2020 high court ruling that the tobacco ban was unconstitutional and invalid. The respondents in the action were British American Tobacco South Africa (Batsa), plus “farmers, processors, manufacturers, retailers and consumers, situated at every level of the supply chain for tobacco and vaping products”. The SCA awarded costs against her, including the costs of the expert witnesses led by Batsa. Background The respondents launched an urgent application to the high court in June 2020 for an order declaring that Regulation 45, which provided for the ban on the sale of tobacco products during the Covid-19 lockdown, was unconstitutional and invalid. The respondents argued that Regulation 45 “constituted an infringement of the fundamental rights to dignity, privacy, bodily and psychological integrity, freedom of trade, and property”. The high court made an order declaring Regulation 45 inconsistent with the Constitution and invalid, that Regulation 45 did not reduce the strain on the health system, and directed each party to pay its own costs. The minister then appealed. The basic facts Batsa did not challenge the initial prohibition on the sale of tobacco under lockdown, until it became clear that the government intended to continue enforcing the ban. The SCA noted that the prohibition on the sale of tobacco products “had an adverse effect on some 11 million users of tobacco and vaping products in South Africa”, whether smoking for pleasure or to alleviate stress. The fiscus was negatively impacted by the loss of excise duties payable by manufacturers of tobacco products – “approximately R2.4 billion in taxes was lost during the first eight weeks of the lockdown”. The loss of revenue was experienced by all players in the tobacco value chain. Illegal cigarette sales soared. Read: Consumer criminalisation could encourage a culture of tax avoidance The SCA referred to a research paper published in May 2020, termed the Walbeek Report, which found that smokers turned to illegal cigarettes, only 16% of those surveyed quit smoking during lockdown, and the prohibition “impacted adversely on their well-being”. The minister’s case on justification The minister justified the tobacco ban as follows: However, the SCA found: The right of freedom of trade On the constitutional right of freedom of trade, the SCA found that: Not only has the fiscus been deprived of the excise taxes and the taxes on taxable income during the tobacco ban, but it will now have to pick up all these legal costs. Ultimately, the taxpayers bear the burden. Barbara Curson holds shares in Batsa. Curson visited the British American Tobacco Kenya tobacco plant in 2019, at its cost, to observe the workings of the ‘track and trace’ system for tobacco products.