Truckers protesting against the hiring of foreign nationals as drivers blocked key routes to South Africa’s biggest port and commercial hub of Johannesburg, prompting a body representing the nation’s road freight industry to seek President Cyril Ramaphosa’s intervention to find a solution to repeated closures of arterial roads. Read: ‘Without trucks, South Africa stops’ All lanes of traffic on the N3 highway are closed near Van Reenen in the KwaZulu-Natal province and traffic has also been disrupted in the vicinity of Tweedie due to trucks blockading the Johannesburg bound carriageway, according to the N3 Toll Concession, which manages the route. Law enforcement officers and government departments are on the scene near Van Reenen’s Pass to try clear the blockage, provincial police spokesman Brigadier Jay Naicker said by phone. 14h03 16/06 #TrafficAlert: #Obstruction #VanReenenPass remains CLOSED to traffic. Recovery operations are in progress. #JoburgBound traffic is being directed off the N3 at Colenso/Frere Interchange. Please delay travel to the area. — N3 Toll Concession (@N3Route) June 16, 2022  13h58 16/06 #TrafficAlert: N3-4 Km15.2N #Obstruction in the vicinity of #Tweedie due to trucks blockading the #JoburgBound carriageway. Please delay travel to the area. — N3 Toll Concession (@N3Route) June 16, 2022  Similar blockades took place on several national routes last year that led Ramaphosa to instruct a panel headed by Employment and Labor Minister Thulas Nxesi to address the All Truck Drivers Foundation’s long-standing grievances that include the employment of foreign drivers and issues relating to professional driving permits. Blockages also took place on the N3 route near the Roadside and Reitz interchange, between Warden and Villiers in the central Free State province earlier this week. South Africa’s Road Freight Association in an open letter to Ramaphosa on Thursday said the N3 has been obstructed for more than 24 hours with over 350 trucks on either direction of the route. “Our drivers are exposed to severe cold, possible violent looting or other aggravated assault and do not have the means to survive for days stranded in a truck in the middle of nowhere,” the association’s Chief Executive Officer Gavin Kelly said. He called on Ramaphosa to instruct the ministers of police, transport and defence and military veterans to restore order and address the concerns of the body. The highway’s link to Durban port is also key to shippers from many African countries including the Democratic Republic of Congo, Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The frequent challenges on key routes mean “we will lose trade and business to and through South Africa,” Kelly said. “Our ports will become ghost towns — and the surrounding businesses relating to those activities of trade and support will close. More unemployment.” The body estimates that the repeated disruptions may have cost the economy around R300 million. © 2022 Bloomberg