FNB has announced additional eBucks incentives to help its rewards customers to offset record-high fuel prices. For the next three months, it will give qualifying customers an additional R2 per litre back in eBucks for fuel purchases made at its exclusive fuel partner Engen. The extra benefit is available to customers regardless of their reward level and will be awarded in addition to what they would ordinarily earn. To qualify for the additional benefit, customers have to pay with their FNB or RMB Private Bank virtual cards (or through partner wallets such as Apple Pay, Samsung Pay and Garmin Pay) when paying for their fuel at Engen. They also need to complete at least one online additional virtual card transaction per month at any merchant. CEO of eBucks Rewards, Johan Moolman, says that with this extra benefit, “A customer who uses FNB Aspire would have earned 60 cents per litre at Engen, but due to this benefit, they could earn R2.60 in eBucks until September 30. Similarly, Private Banking and Commercial Banking customers who earn up to R4 per litre at Engen could earn up to R6 per litre for the limited period. “Similarly, FNB customers who swipe their Clicks Clubcard at Engen when filling up will earn an additional 10 cents per litre in Clicks Clubcard points.” Customers who fill up at Engen and have vehicle instalments with WesBank are still eligible for the Double Up benefit, where they earn up to R8 p/l per quarter in eBucks; these customers will now earn up to R10 p/l per quarter in eBucks over the next three months. eBucks fuel rewards are already amongst the most generous of those on offer by banks and retailer loyalty or rewards programmes. Read: Fuel rewards compared as Capitec and Nedbank launch theirs Raj Makanjee, CEO of FNB Retail, says, “Fuel is one of our customers’ largest expenses, and while eBucks has been helping customers to mitigate the cost for years, the recent fuel price increases are unprecedented. As a result, we encourage our customers to maximise this limited benefit to reduce the impact of fuel on their budgets, especially in light of other rising costs such as food, electricity and interest rates. “Over the years, our fuel rewards with Engen have provided our customers with more than R1 billion in value, and we are delighted to continually increase the impact of our rewards to customers who bank with us.” FNB says nearly 3.4 million customers will have access to this additional benefit.