William Louw, Sable International SA tax director, says he’s seldom seen such a flood of South Africans looking to emigrate. “I’m booked solid for weeks,” he says. “The reasons people want to leave vary, but at the bottom of it all they want a Plan B. They see the country deteriorating, and believe it might get worse, and they are concerned about safety, education for their kids, and for some it is just that there are better opportunities abroad.” Emigration is a huge decision with serious financial implications. Living abroad has a major impact on how much tax you pay and to which country that tax is paid. Your tax residency status determines how you are taxed in a particular country. South Africans who have left the country must now obtain a letter from the South African Revenue Service (Sars) to confirm their tax non-residency status, which is only issued to those permanently leaving the country. To apply for the letter, you must complete the tax emigration process through Sars. Those living abroad without this letter could find themselves obliged to report their global earnings every year to Sars. This also creates problems for those living abroad and drawing living annuities from a South African fund. “A lot of people left in the 1990s and are well past retirement age, yet no longer have SA passports. The Sars eFiling system is linked to the ID document that Sars has on file, which may no longer be valid. We are having to assist several clients to regularise their status,” says Louw. Understanding tax residency Whether you reside in South Africa or abroad, you will be subject to income tax. There are two concerns: where do you pay taxes and how do you avoid paying more than one tax on the same income? If you reside in SA, you will most likely be considered a resident here for tax purposes (though there are some rare exceptions). South African tax residents must pay Sars taxes on their income earned in South Africa along with foreign income, in instances where that income exceeds a certain amount. Leaving South Africa does not automatically classify you as a non-tax resident. If you are a tax resident living overseas, you can be taxed on foreign income that exceeds the R1.25 million threshold. You may be affected by double taxation as well, warns Louw. However, the process of becoming a non-tax resident in South Africa is not automatic. The only way to change your tax status is to formally undergo the relevant legal processes through Sars. Understanding double taxation agreements Tax returns are always to be filed in the country where you are not a tax resident first. It is possible that, in certain instances, a particular amount may be taxed twice since tax systems differ from country to country. Double taxation can however be alleviated through various Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs). By disclosing the tax which you will pay in the country that you are tax resident in, you can usually avoid double taxation. This is where advice from a professional tax practitioner familiar with international tax is crucial. Benefits of ceasing your South African tax residency The benefits of tax non-residency: Importance of having a Sars non-residency tax letter If you are tax resident in South Africa, you are legally required to submit tax returns to Sars every year. You must declare your worldwide earnings, both local and foreign, and then claim any exemptions or tax credits on foreign earnings. If you do not formally note yourself as a tax non-resident, Sars will automatically classify you as a tax resident in South Africa. The non-residency tax letter is important for three reasons: Louw notes that once you are deemed a non-tax resident by Sars, the Reserve Bank no longer allows you to use your Single Discretionary Allowance to transfer funds out of SA. You have to prove you have a non-residence letter from Sars or use your Foreign Investment Allowance (FIA). “It is important to take the necessary steps, knowing that Sars does not automatically issue the letter of tax non-residency (as they promised they would),” says Louw. “Know your tax status and act accordingly so that you are not negatively affected.” Sable International provides comprehensive tax services and advice for South Africans at home and abroad and anyone with South African income. It can be reached at taxsa@sableinternational.com or by phone at +27 (0) 21 657 1517. Brought to you by Sable International. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.