Debt is an unavoidable part of the human experience. Moreover, you and other South Africans now face a unique challenge; consumerist culture, unexpected financial curveballs and the relentless selling of instant gratification. Combine that with easy access to credit, and it becomes the perfect storm of losing control of your finances. That is why debt management is an essential strategy to bring and keep your financial situation under control. Continuously implementing a debt management plan, can ensure that you: Having authority over your finances can help you experience true financial freedom and turn your money into a powerful ally. But, if debt is left unchecked, it will become your ruthless enemy. With this being said, what are the five steps to carry out a successful debt management plan? Step 1: Revise your financial situation The first step is to get an idea of your current financial position. Answer these three questions to get your first debt management step in check: Did you know that you can pull your record for free, every year, at any registered credit bureau? Step 2: Compare your current income amount to your debt amount(s) The second step to proper debt management is to calculate your current debt-to-income ratio. Here’s how in a nutshell: **Note: Any percentage above 40 is an alert sign. The higher the percentage, the closer you are to over-indebtedness. Step 3: Prioritise what debt to pay off sooner Prioritising debt doesn’t mean not paying certain debts; you should still meet all your monthly debt obligations. Prioritising your debt means that you identify the most damaging debt to your finances and use your budget to find ways to pay these debts off sooner. Debts that increase your financial worth should be grouped into “good debt”, and debts with no long-term value can be grouped into “bad debt”. Step 4: Set up a personal budget Now that the groundwork of setting up a budget has already been completed, you should continue to keep at it. Here is a basic budget outline that you can start off with: Step 5: Use your budget to manage your debt and if needed, get professional help Answer these five questions to make sure you continue to budget properly and manage your debt accordingly: Effective debt management is the key to taking control of your financial situation and it is a life skill you will be happy to have mastered. Take a confident step to get your plan going and keep at it to turn your money into a powerful ally. Carla Oberholzer is a debt adviser at DebtSafe.