If you have offshore funds in a foreign bank kindly advise how we may invest it offshore? What would the tax implications be? Also when our children inherit it what tax is due?   Dear reader, Understanding the global tax consequences of a South African resident with offshore investments is complicated as legislation, treaty arrangements and the administrative rules and processes of an investment ‘house’ have to be considered. As a South African tax resident, you are allowed a single discretionary allowance within a limit of R1 million per calendar year and a foreign capital allowance with a limit of R10 million per calendar year. The foreign capital allowance is, however, subject to a tax clearance from the South African Revenue Service (Sars). Once the funds are in your foreign account, and subject to applicable rules and administrative requirements from the source state, you can invest directly into the chosen offshore investment vehicle. The investment vehicle, the amount and the place of such investment will determine what tax, and other costs, will apply while you are alive and also what taxes and other costs are applicable on your death. It has to be noted that where South African residents have investments abroad, their estates could be liable for the payment of situs tax, even though the investor was at the time of their death neither tax resident nor domiciled in that particular country. In addition to the impact of income and capital gains taxes on offshore investments, the global estate duty consequences on such investments could add an additional level of complexity to the overall wealth, succession, investment planning and estate administration process. By way of example, a tax resident in South Africa has to consider the potential effects of income tax, capital gains tax, dividends tax and estate duty on their worldwide assets, subject to possible rebates in terms of a double tax treaty with the contracting state. Australia has no inheritance or gift tax, but in certain circumstances an immediate income tax liability can arise upon death. New Zealand currently has no form of estate duty, inheritance tax or capital transfer tax. The UK and the US, in turn, currently levy estate taxes at a rate of 40% on the value exceeding £325 000 and $60 000 respectively. It is however imperative to choose the optimal vehicle when investing, taking your risk capacity, situs, probate and other costs into consideration. Also, consider whether your will takes into consideration your investments abroad or have you drafted a separate will for those offshore investments? I would advise working with a registered tax and fiduciary practitioner with specialisation in multi-jurisdictional estates, together with your financial advisor, to ensure that you are structuring your estate to reflect your concerns and objectives.     There are a few questions raised that I will try to deal with. First and foremost I must ask if the funds are legitimate? This may sound like a strange question but believe me, there are many people who have foreign funds that have not been declared to Sars. If you are a SA-registered taxpayer and the SA authorities are not aware of the funds then my first suggestion will be to legitimise the funds as soon as possible. Penalties for non-compliance are severe. When it comes to investing funds offshore the same basic principles for investing locally apply, namely: what is the objective of the investment, what is the investment term, do you require liquidity, and how much risk (volatility) are you prepared to accept? There are various offshore structures available and obviously many more investment choices than in the SA market. One must however be mindful of the tax liabilities in various jurisdictions and products. You must be cognisant of the following: As you can see there are numerous factors to consider and the space provided to field your question is not enough to provide a fully comprehensive answer. I suggest that you contact a suitably qualified financial advisor who focuses on offshore investing to assist you.  