JSE-listed private education provider AdvTech group is reporting a 33% surge in headlines earnings per share (Heps) for the full year period ending December 2021, saying the performance was boosted by good enrolment growth and improvements in collections and on efficiency. The group, which owns tertiary educations brands like Vega School, Varsity College and Rosebank College in South Africa, posted an 8% rise in group revenue for the period to R5.9 billion, up from the R5.5 billion reported in the previous comparable period. The group’s operating profit for the period rose by 22% to R1.108 billion from R908 million in the 2020 period, while operating margins strengthened to 18.7% from 16.5% in the previous year. The group says the strong cash generated in this period helped reduce its borrowings and continues to maintain a sound balance sheet. “AdvTech has delivered another set of strong results for the twelve months to December 2021 reinforcing the group’s consistent performance and further highlighting the quality of its assets and robust business model,” AdvTech’s CEO Roy Douglas says in a Sens statement. AdvTech reinstated its dividend, declaring a final gross dividend of 31 cents, bringing its full year dividend to 50 cents, up from 20 cents in the 2020 comparable period. Performance of Schools division The group’s schools in South Africa recorded a 4% increase in revenue to R2.2 billion for the period, this it says is despite the decision to waiver fee increases in the period. The South Africa division also saw a 10% improvement in operating profit for the full year to R413 million, up from the R376 million reported in the 2020 full year, while operating margin saw a slight increase from 17.8% to 18.9%. “The group continues to benefit from the implementation of revised structures, improved systems, enhanced technological capability and strong financial management,” Douglas says. “These initiatives contributed to AdvTech’s ability to adapt to the challenges created by the pandemic and, at the same time, sustain a high level of performance,” he adds. On the other hand, its Rest of Africa Schools division – which owns education brands like Gaborone International School in Botswana, The Makini Group of Schools and Crawford International in Kenya – saw revenue increase by 36% to R268 million in the period, up from R197 million in the previous comparable period. The Rest of Africa division also saw operating profit increase to R47 million, significantly higher than the R10 million recorded in 2020. “Schools in Rest of Africa recorded good enrolment growth, remain operationally sound and posted higher profitably and returns on investment,” the group says. Tertiary Education division According to Africa’s largest private education provider, although the delayed release of the 2020 Matric results severely disrupted the 2021 tertiary education student enrolment cycle, its enrolment numbers continued to see growth, both in online and in-person delivery modes. AdvTech’s tertiary division saw a 4% rise in revenue to R2.4 billion, up from R2.3 billion in the previous period. Operating profit for the division increased to R609 million while operating margin improved from 23% to 25% in the period. Read: Growth in student numbers bolsters Stadio’s FY results Looking forward, the group says it hopes to tap into the growing demand for education in the regions in which it operates. “AdvTech is uniquely positioned to leverage the advantages of our brands, structures, systems and financial strength to benefit from the growth in demand for education that is anticipated to continue both in South Africa and the Rest of Africa.” “In addition, the inherent strong cash generation of our business model continues to strengthen our balance sheet and will enable us to invest in areas of opportunity with confidence,” Douglas says.