You can register here. This year has been highly dynamic from an investment perspective – impacted largely by factors such as inflationary pressures, Covid recovery uncertainty and a mountain of political instability globally, not to mention the Russia/Ukraine crisis that presents an entirely new influx of uncertainty and risk. The question is, can our market expect a further downturn, are there still risks and what can we do to combat this negative market movement? The reality is that advisors are striving to ensure the best possible solutions for their clients in a volatile market and while this is tough currently, we have to ask ourselves: what role does independent investing play? What advantages does it have in such an unpredictable local and global environment? Wealthport, together with leading market players, addresses this and other aspects in this upcoming webinar taking place on Wednesday, March 30 at 11:00. You can register for it here. Debra Slabber
Portfolio specialist, Morningstar Investment Management South Africa Slabber is responsible for the institutional business relationships and portfolio management within the South African business. Slabber works closely with the global investment team to bring best practice investment ideas to the South African business and its clients.  Prior to joining Morningstar, she spent four years at PSG Asset Management as a senior fund specialist, predominantly responsible for growing the business in the greater Gauteng region. She started her career at Standard Bank, fulfilling various roles including as a financial analyst within personal markets and a financial manager of unsecured lending products. She later moved across the business to Corporate and Investment Banking and spent three and a half years as a product controller for the interest rate trading and structured derivatives desks. Slabber has been involved as a lecturer for MBA students at Milpark Business School. She holds a BCom, with a major in investment management, and a BCom (Hons) in financial management from the University of Pretoria. She is a chartered financial analyst (CFA®) and has 13 years’ experience in the financial services industry.  Charles Brits
Sales manager, Wealthport  Prior to starting at Wealthport, Brits spent 15 years with Liberty Group as a broker consultant, branch manager, franchise principle and later a senior sales manager in the tied environment. He then joined PPS as a national broker development manager. He brings with him 18 years of financial services industry experience, together with a wealth of knowledge, expertise and well-established relationships in Gauteng, the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal. Brits holds the CFP® designation for professionals and is also a member of the Financial Planning Institute of Southern Africa [FPI]. While he is passionate about the industry he believes in a work/family life balance and when time allows, he enjoys exercising and being outdoors.   Melissa Dyer
Director, key individual, joint CIO, CFA®, Harbour Wealth Dyer is a director at Harbour Wealth, a proudly independent and innovative family office focussed on securing better outcomes for its clients. With more than 16 years’ investment experience, eight of which she spent at STANLIB as head of retail channel and product marketing, and as a member of the investment committee; she is also joint chief investment officer at Harbour. Dyer is a certified financial planner and Key Individual of the business. She holds a Bachelor of Commerce Honours Degree in Economics from the University of Johannesburg, majoring in International Trade and Finance. She has also completed her Postgraduate CFP qualification, and is a member of the FPI. Dyer has also successfully completed the RE1, RE5 and RE3 regulatory exams.