Germany and Italy were among countries which said any effort by Russian President Vladimir Putin to charge in roubles for gas would be a violation of their contracts. President Joe Biden called for removing Russia from the G-20. Group of Seven leaders warned Putin against deploying biological, chemical or nuclear weapons in Ukraine. Earlier Thursday, NATO agreed to double the number of battle groups protecting its eastern border and prepare for Russia to potentially use such weapons in Ukraine. The heightened military readiness underscores the intense pressure on US President Joe Biden and other leaders gathered in Brussels for meetings of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the European Union and the Group of Seven leading economies. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy scolded NATO leaders for not responding to his plea for a no-fly zone over Ukraine and asked for more weapons for his military to fight off Russia’s invasion. He also called on G-7 leaders to tighten sanctions on Russia.  All times CET: Leaders of the European Union are expected to back a modest tightening of earlier sanctions against Russia for its invasion of Ukraine, but refrain from imposing major new measures, as countries remain divided on whether to tackle energy supplies. Under pressure from the US and with Biden in Brussels as their guest, the leaders are likely to approve sanctioning more Russian tycoons and the closing of some loopholes as early as Thursday night, according to EU diplomats who declined to be named on a confidential issue. But they are expected to avoid a major cut-off of oil and gas purchases despite a push from several countries, the diplomats said. Biden said that the world will experience food shortages as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and production increases were a subject of discussions at a Group of Seven meeting on Thursday. “It’s going to be real,” Biden said of food shortages at a news conference in Brussels. Ukraine and Russia are both major producers of wheat, in particular, and Kyiv’s government has already warned that the country’s planting and harvest has been severely disrupted by the war. Biden said he’s also urging all nations including those in Europe to drop trade restrictions that could restrict exports of food. Biden said he told China’s President Xi Jinping of “significant jeopardy” to his nation’s economy if he backed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. “Yes, Russia should be removed from the G-20,” Biden said in a news conference after meetings with allies in Brussels. Putin plans to attend the Group of 20 summit hosted by Indonesia later this year, Russia’s envoy to the Southeast Asian country said, brushing off talk of excluding him due to the war in Ukraine. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz, Italian Premier Mario Draghi and their counterparts in other EU nations told Russia to honor payments for energy exports in the currency stated in the contract, usually US dollars or euros. Gas prices surged more than 30% after Putin on Wednesday ordered the Russian central bank to develop a mechanism to force some countries to make ruble payments for natural gas within a week. “Most agreements and most treaties are absolutely precise about the currency in which the payment has to be done,” Scholz said at a news conference after chairing talks with G-7 counterparts. “And this is how it is today and we will follow the situation and the development.” Draghi said any request for payment in roubles would be “a contract violation, and contracts are considered violated if Russia will implement this condition.” Austrian Chancellor Karl Nehammer said his nation won’t agree to an embarro on Russian gas or oil deliveries, telling reporters in Brussels that to sanction Russian energy would be “unrealistic” not only for Austria but other EU members such as Hungary, Czech Republic and Slovakia. The EU should instead coordinate and focus on loopholes in the current “massive” sanctions package. The United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities in Ukraine while blaming Russia for the humanitarian crisis there. The resolution received 140 votes in favor, 5 votes against, and 38 abstentions. The vote followed a failed Russian effort at the UN Security Council on Wednesday to pass a resolution on Ukraine that urged humanitarian aid to the country without mentioning Russia’s invasion. Only China joined Russia in voting for that resolution, as 13 countries abstained. In principle there is a clear decision we should “cut off” Russian oil and gas deliveries, Latvian President Egils Levits said in an interview with Bloomberg TV. “We should pay for our freedom and our independence.” Paying in dollars or euros is better than “paying in blood,” Levits said. Latvia, which gets most of its natural gas from Russia, has gas reserves and can buy LNG to replace Russian gas, he said. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy asked G-7 nations to strengthen sanctions on Russia. Speaking in a video address to the group, he also called for more weapons deliveries to his nation and urged the group to participate in creation of new security guarantees for Ukraine. Asked about the potential that Russia might use of chemical weapons, Finland’s Prime Minister Sanna Marin said there’s reason to be concerned. “Russia has, through its actions, shown it is capable of anything and that it follows no international rules that it has previously committed to, so yes, anything can be expected of Russia” said Marin, whose home country of 5.5 million people has the EU’s longest border with Russia. “We need to have a discussion on how we would react in such a case.” Leaders are “united in the willingness to tighten sanctions, and especially to look for all the loopholes, which currently weaken the impact of sanctions,” she said. “We want to ensure they really work.” Latvian Prime Minister Krisjanis Karins said EU leaders should look at imposing temporary restrictive measures on Russian energy products. “I will argue again tonight that we have to look at serious energy sanctions as well because this is the main source of income for the Russian government,” Karins told reporters in Brussels before a meeting with his EU counterparts. “I think the most logical place to move forward is oil and coal.” The Biden administration has no objection to other nations sending aircraft to Ukraine even as it continues to believe that Russia would see a US transfer of planes as an escalatory move, Pentagon spokesman John Kirby said. “One thing is for sure: The United States has not put a veto on other nations who may want to provide aircraft to the Ukrainian armed forces,” Kirby said on Bloomberg Television from the NATO summit in Brussels. “President Zelenskiy says he wants them and individual nations can make those sovereign decisions.” In an appearance on Fox News, Kirby said Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin and Joint Chiefs Chairman Mark Milley had been spurned in efforts to communicate directly with their Russian counterparts to convey concerns about the Ukraine invasion. The US announced a new package of sanctions on Russian elites, lawmakers and defense companies. The full blocking sanctions affect more than 400 individuals and entities, including the Duma, Russia’s lower house of parliament, and 328 of its members, more than a dozen Russian elites and 48 Russian defense companies. The sanctions will hit Herman Gref, the head of Russia’s Sberbank and adviser to President Vladimir Putin; Russian billionaire Gennady Timchenko, his companies and members; as well as 17 board members of the Russian financial institution Sovcombank. Among the defense companies being sanctioned are Russian Helicopters, Tactical Missiles Corporation, High Precision Systems, NPK Tekhmash OAO and Kronshtadt, the White House said. I’m announcing additional sanctions on over 400 Russian elites, lawmakers, and defense companies in response to Putin’s war of choice in Ukraine. They personally gain from the Kremlin’s policies, and they should share in the pain. — President Biden (@POTUS) March 24, 2022 The US will welcome up to 100,000 people fleeing Russian violence in Ukraine, using a variety of legal pathways to allow them to enter the country, a senior Biden administration official said. Some of those allowed into the country will come as refugees, but the US will permit others to seek parole status or immigrant or non-immigrant visas, the official said, without defining a timeline for the arrivals. The official suggested people fleeing the conflict could come to the US over the course of several years. The leaders of NATO’s 30 member states issued a statement after their summit in Brussels that called on all countries, including China, “to abstain from supporting Russia’s war effort in any way, and to refrain from any action that helps Russia circumvent sanctions.” They urged China “to cease amplifying the Kremlin’s false narratives, in particular on the war and on NATO, and to promote a peaceful resolution to the conflict.” NATO leaders extended the term of Jens Stoltenberg for another year as the alliance’s secretary general, leading the response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Leaders meeting at NATO headquarters in Brussels agreed that he should remain in the job, even though he had been selected to head Norway’s central bank. A senior US official said Washington is working with allies on preparation and deterrence postures over Russian weapons of mass destruction, as well as on potential medical and other countermeasures to help Ukraine. The US warnings show growing concern that Putin will lash out with his military suffering heavy losses. Biden, speaking at the White House Wednesday, said there’s “a real threat” that Russia will use chemical weapons. The world’s leading economic powers will warn Putin against using chemical or nuclear weapons in Ukraine in a draft statement the G-7 plans to issue on Thursday. The leaders also plan to say that they will continue to impose “severe consequences” on Russia by fully implementing the sanctions that countries have already imposed and stand ready to apply additional measures. Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu reported to Putin and other top officials on the Ukraine “operation” in a video conference, the Kremlin said. Shoigu was shown on a video screen in front of Putin in his first public appearance in nearly two weeks, though there was no way to confirm when it took place. Earlier Thursday, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Shoigu was too busy to do media events. State television also showed what it said was video from the meeting, but didn’t include any sound. Separately, the Defense Ministry said a top commander from the Eastern Military District had visited troops near the front lines about 30 km from Kyiv. Ukraine has reported killing a number of senior Russian commanders in the month-long war but Moscow hasn’t confirmed that. Zelenskiy criticized NATO for not responding to his call to give or sell Ukraine 1% of its tanks and aircraft. Speaking at the alliance’s summit on Thursday, he also decried NATO’s refusal to impose a no-fly zone, even as Russia has attacked Ukrainian cities with more than 1,000 missiles and hundreds of airstrikes. “On February 24, I addressed you with a perfectly clear, logical request to help close our skies. In any format. Protect our people from Russian bombs and missiles. We did not hear a clear answer,” Zelenskiy told the summit. “And you see the consequences today — how many people were killed, how many peaceful cities were destroyed.” Zelenskiy also said he believed Russia won’t stop in Ukraine and may eventually move against NATO’s Baltic members and Poland. In an earlier address to Sweden’s parliament, he said all of Russia’s neighbors are in danger, pointing to growing Russia interest in Sweden’s Baltic Sea island of Gotland. Ann Linde @AnnLinde Sent via Twitter for iPhone. View original tweet. Germany’s BDEW energy industry group said it sees “concrete and serious indications” that the country’s natural gas-supply situation is about to deteriorate and urged the government to issue the first level of warning in its emergency plan. The BDEW, which represents Germany’s main gas and electricity suppliers, said it can’t rule out disruptions after Russian President Vladimir Putin demanded payment in roubles. Economy Minister Robert Habeck opened the door to at least discussing energy sanctions on Russia in a speech to the Bundestag on Thursday. Habeck, from the German Greens, said that sanctions on Russian gas, oil and coal would be a potential “game changer” for the war but cautioned that Berlin isn’t yet in a position to take such action. That admission, he said, was “bitter.” The UK said it has sanctioned 65 more individuals and entities in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including Alfa-Bank JSC and the diamond mining company Alrosa. Foreign Secretary Liz Truss also sanctioned Eugene Shvidler, a billionaire oil businessman with close business links to Roman Abramovich and Oleg Tinkov, founder of Tinkoff Bank. Herman Gref, chief executive officer of Sberbank, the largest Russian bank and an adviser of Putin, was also listed. A month of war has displaced 4.3 million Ukrainian children, more than half the country’s child population, according to the United Nations global relief organization Unicef. The agency says 1.8 million children have crossed into neighboring countries as refugees while another 2.5 million have moved within Ukraine. Ukrainian refugees and their children at the Medyka border crossing in Medyka, Poland, on Friday, March 18, 2022. The number of refugees reaching Poland from Ukraine now exceeds 2 million, mostly women with children, Polish border authorities said. A journalist filming damage in Kyiv’s Podil district was killed on Wednesday along with a civilian during a rocket strike on a shopping center, according to the Insider, the investigative website she worked for. Oksana Baulina left Russia after the previous organization she worked for, the Anti-Corruption Foundation, was listed as an extremist group by Moscow. Her death brings the number of journalists reported to have been killed since Russia’s invasion began to seven, according to the Press Emblem Campaign group. Dozens of others have been injured. The head of NATO warned Russia that any attack with chemical weapons would have far-reaching consequences. “Any use of chemical weapons would fundamentally change the nature of the conflict, it would be a blatant violation of international law and it will have widespread and severe consequences,” Jens Stoltenberg told reporters as he arrived for the NATO summit in Brussels. The risk of contamination would mean “a catastrophe for the people of Ukraine but of course the risk is also that we can see the spread of the chemical agents in NATO territory.” Slovenian Premier Janez Jansa said member states would “consider some acts” as a direct attack on NATO countries. He didn’t elaborate. Russian measures meant to prop up the stock market helped lift shares in the first day of trading following a record shutdown of the equity market. Ukraine destroyed the Russian amphibious landing ship Orsk, docked in the Russian-controlled port of Berdyansk, it said in on Facebook and Twitter. There was no immediate comment from Russia on the claim. Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba called on EU countries to make a “wise and responsible” choice when it comes to paying Russia in roubles for gas and oil, as Putin demanded on Wednesday. Given its “thousands of casualties” in the past month, Russia is likely now looking to mobilize reservists and conscripts, as well as leaning on private military companies and foreign mercenaries, the UK defense ministry said in a daily assessment. “It is unclear how these groups will integrate into the Russian ground forces in Ukraine, and the impact this will have on combat effectiveness,” the ministry said.  © 2022 Bloomberg