You can register here. The promotion of greater inclusion of black business and black participants in the economy has supported the uplifting role which private equity can play in the market. Private equity has become increasingly appreciated as an asset class and an enabler to business owners and management teams who require capital to grow their businesses or who want to realise their investment value, while supporting empowerment objectives. What options do private companies have to improve their black ownership? In this upcoming webinar, MoneywebNOW’s Simon Brown will unpack this with Yougan Moodley and Sarah Thompson, two senior members of Nedbank Private Equity, and much more: This webinar will take place on Tuesday, March 29 at 14:00. You can register here. More on the guests:

Yougan Moodley 
Principal at Nedbank Private Equity Moodley is a Principal at Nedbank Private Equity. He qualified as a CA (SA) with PwC. He joined BoE Equity Partners in 2002 and shortly thereafter he became a member of the Nedbank Private Equity team following the merger between BoE and Nedbank in 2003. Moodley has led and been involved in transactions and companies in the industrial, retail, energy and technology and telecommunications sectors.  Sarah Thompson
Principal at Nedbank Private Equity Thompson is a Principal in the Nedbank Private Equity team. She started her career in corporate finance, gaining experience in M&A and capital markets across various industries. Thompson is a CFA charterholder.   Nedbank Private Equity is a prominent and leading private equity investor having successfully invested in a broad range of companies over the past 25 years. Nedbank Private Equity is driving growth by offering more than providing capital – NPE becomes a strategic partner, offering depth of operational and industry experience, strong financial acumen, networks and access to markets. Nedbank Private Equity has participated and supported black empowerment in the past and will continue to support black ownership going forward.