Judge Cloete, in a Tax Court judgment handed down on February 25, 2022, considered delays by the South African Revenue Service (Sars) in providing a taxpayer the grounds for additional assessments amounting to R8.4 million raised against the taxpayer so egregious that the taxpayer was granted final relief. In other words, the additional assessments were voided, and costs were awarded against Sars. The taxpayer made a request for punitive costs to be awarded against Sars at the last minute, that is, costs on the attorney-client scale, but this request did not come in time to give Sars adequate time to deal with it in its papers. Background Sars raised additional assessments in March 2020 in regard to the taxpayer’s 2016 to 2018 years of assessment. The taxpayer requested Sars to provide reasons for the assessment, and Sars not only missed the prescribed 30-day deadline, it “unilaterally imposed” an extension to furnish its reasons, without requesting the taxpayer’s permission. Needless to say, the taxpayer duly delivered its objection within the required period, but Sars missed its deadline for delivering its decision on the objection. The taxpayer issued a formal notice to Sars, which solicited a partial disallowance of the objection 10 days after the deadline. The taxpayer appealed to the assessment in time, but Sars failed to deliver the required Section 31 notice providing the reasons for the assessment in time. Further, Sars did not request condonation for the late notice, as is required by law, nor did it provide a reason for the delay. On June 17, 2021, Ms Mukwevho from the Sars litigation unit blamed the delay on the “backlog as a result of Covid-19, lack of capacity and no filling of vacancies across Sars …”. The taxpayer gave Sars a one-month extension, which Mukwevho “erroneously interpreted” to be a later date. The matter was then allocated to Mr Sehloho in the same unit. The taxpayer threatened to bring an application for condonation of the assessment in terms of Rule 52(6). But Sars only served its Rule 31 statement on September 21, 2021, 36 days after the agreed extended timeline. It is apparent that Sars was not able to write the Rule 31 notice itself, and had to brief external counsel to do so. The taxpayer was notified that Sars had “recently briefed counsel”, but this was untrue. Counsel was only “briefed and given instructions” on August 12, 2021. Sars behaving badly The judge found the following in regard to Sars’s behaviour: Prejudice to the taxpayer It was crucial to the taxpayer’s business that it was reflected as “tax compliant” on Sars’s eFiling system. Sars may not undertake recovery proceedings if a taxpayer requests a suspension of payment, unless Sars “holds a reasonable belief that there is a risk of dissipation of assets by the taxpayer”. Even though Sars did not have such a concern, it issued the taxpayer with a final demand for payment on June 18, 2020. The taxpayer pointed out Sars’s error, and Sars approved the payment suspension request on September 3, 2020. However, Sars insisted that the taxpayer pay the disputed, yet suspended debt, before it would change the status to compliant. When the taxpayer threated Sars with a high court application, Sars changed the status to tax compliant on January 29, 2021. On February 22, 2021, Sars revoked the suspension, and reflected the taxpayer as not compliant, ignoring the provisions of the Tax Administration Act (TAA). Sars made further swaps of the taxpayer’s status between tax compliant and non-compliant. The taxpayer gave examples of the severe prejudice it suffered: Sars admonished and taxpayer granted final relief Judge Cloete found that: The taxpayer was granted final relief.