 SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Dobek Pater, director for business development at Africa Analysis. Dobek, I appreciate the early morning time. Spectrum auctions have been promised year after year, but finally have happened. A two-part [question] up front. Are they completed and has there been success, I suppose in part raising capital for government but, more importantly, have the telcos received what they wanted or needed? Read: Ramaphosa’s reform agenda gets a broadband boost DOBEK PATER: Thanks. Good morning to you and the listeners. Yes, the auction has been concluded and, as you indicated, it has been long and waiting, and it has been successful. On the one hand it has raised more funds for the government, for the fiscus, than was expected. There was an expectation, based on floor pricing and the different spectrum lots available, that it would be maybe around R8 billion, a bit more, but it ended up being R14.4 billion, which means that spectrum is valuable to the operators that bid for that spectrum. They were willing to pay more for the spectrum than just the price indicated by Icasa, the market regulator [the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa], and the operators by and large got what they wanted. They got good-sized blocks of high-demand spectrum frequencies, which will allow them to expand or improve on the 4G-model networks that they have been running for the past 10 years and [can] continue building at a much faster pace the new 5G networks. SIMON BROWN: Is that in essence what the telcos are looking for, more capacity? As a complete layman here it means I’m going to get perhaps better speeds, more reliable signals? In essence, [it’s] ultimately around customer experience? Is that a fair comment? DOBEK PATER: It’s a very fair comment. So there will be improvements on the 4G networks, which is high-speed broadband in its own right, and a completely new suite of services that will start emerging based on the 5G networks. For the average consumer and, let’s say, small business, it may be a much better quality broadband connectivity. But ultimately we are going to move to a much more digital environment from a social and economic perspective, and 5G will play a significant part in supporting that. I think importantly it also needs to be mentioned that with the spectrum assignment by the market regulator to the operators who paid for the spectrum, there is going to be a set of obligations in return for making that spectrum available. The operators will be required to continue expanding the broadband infrastructure importantly into underserved areas. These will be rural areas, peri-urban areas of lower income social segments. So it’s not only you and myself, for instance, that will ultimately have a better customer experience, but I think consumers [and] also businesses that have been struggling to access good-quality broadband connectivity will be increasingly more able to do so. In parallel to that, the government also is working on a new programme to try and make sure that in fact everyone is connected in the next two to three years. Broadband is becoming the underlying requirement to participate in the evolving future digital society, based on high-speed broadband infrastructure. If we don’t do that, we’re going to see further chasms within our society, a broadband gap between the haves and the have nots and, I think just as importantly, we are going to start sliding further down the ranks of competitiveness globally. SIMON BROWN: That that’s a good point and I’ll take it – and R14 billion for government. Of course, it’s a big spend for telcos, which means we’re not going to see cheaper prices, but we are going to be seeing better quality 4G, 5G coming. Can’t argue with that. Dobek Pater, director for business analysis at Africa Analysis, I appreciate the early morning, sir.