Russia is making coupon and principal payments for bonds due next month and in April 2042, according to filings with the National Settlement Depository. The Finance Ministry filed notifications for an “interest payment” and “principal repayment” on $2 billion of dollar-denominated debt due on April 4, the biggest security maturing since Russia was hit with sanctions following its invasion of Ukraine. In addition, it also filed a notification for a coupon on bonds due in April 2042. Holders of the latter were due to receive an $84 million payment on April 4. The National Settlement Depository, or NSD, in Moscow receives the Russian government’s payments on some of its foreign bonds for distribution. Despite warnings from credit-rating agencies, the government has so far avoided a default since the war started. That said, the process for payments has been uncertain and a $66 million interest payment last week on a $3 billion Eurobond was delayed. Local capital controls and restrictions imposed on Russian assets by the world’s biggest bond settlement systems mean investors are braced for further turbulence. “There are still potential settlement issues and the longer the war lasts, Russia’s economy will suffer some long-term damage,” said Guido Chamorro, co-head of emerging-market hard-currency debt at Pictet Asset Management. “But it is striking that so far, we haven’t seen major defaults in Russia, Ukraine, or the region.” The latest hurdle came at the end of last week when Clearstream, the Luxembourg-based bank that settles payments for some of the nation’s bonds, blocked the NSD’s account. A decision to restart would be based on a review by regulators in Luxembourg, the depository said on March 24. A Clearstream spokeswoman declined to comment at the time of the announcement. Meanwhile, steelmaker Severstal PJSC last week became the first Russian company to run out of time to pay interest on foreign-currency debt since the war in Ukraine began after Citigroup Inc. blocked the transaction.