The summit, championed by President Cyril Ramaphosa and supported by substantial pledges from companies in diverse industries, is perhaps the ultimate display of the ability of Ramaphosa’s New Dawn to woo the private sector and garner support for social collaboration. However, as we have come to know, politics always flounders, making regular blunders because the way decisions are made in government allows the party agenda to mess with the economic wellbeing of the nation. Read:
Gauteng, KZN and the Northern Cape attract the most pledges at investment conference
‘Construction mafia’ disrupting post-unrest rebuilding effort
Read the AG’s report before you invest in a municipality, says Sapoa CEO Thus, there are threats to the successful use of investments from the summit. These threats are the quality of government, poor public governance, and the politicians. Additionally, an inefficient public administration and a weakened desire to tackle corruption have escalated problems of governability. Without good public governance, accountability, and transparency, resources generated in the five years of the investment conference will be squandered, poorly managed and unaccounted for by this government. It is essential to point out that pledges made by the private sector do not mean money into the state coffers, but commitment towards efforts to jumpstart the economy. Government’s ability The analysis here is on the government’s ability to successfully implement programmes, lead reforms, use policies and manage resources to respond to crises. Without political accountability, creating an environment necessary for development and improved socioeconomic conditions will not arise. Read: Mr President, announce major policy reforms Since the advent of democracy, South Africa has experienced the diminished ability of its government to steer policy, let alone combine forward-looking plans with predisposed governance that could make objectives on an initiative like the investment summit successful. The dominance of politics, especially party agenda, will reduce the summit to another talk shop despite all best efforts. If public governance is about the government using the power it has been entrusted with to manage the nation’s economic and social resources, then South Africa has failed. Instead, whenever an issue related to governance arises, it is often parallel to lousy government, political instability and politicians who have leeway from corruption and power-abusing tendencies. When leadership changes … Moreover, as most readers know, the ANC elective congress takes place later in the year, and the new leadership rarely continues with the policies of their predecessors. Within the tripartite alliance – the ruling ANC, the Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) and the South African Communist Party – there are murmurings about the current administration’s closeness to business. Seemingly, the next group will seek to do the opposite and purport to be for the rank-and-file members and ordinary people rather than business. As argued above, the relationship between governance challenges and the quality of government is an essential contributing factor to stalled development and economic and social failures. There are two more. Read:
Ramaphosa tightens hold on ANC ahead of key vote
Ramaphosa ponders woman running mate in SA party race Crisis (mis)management Firstly, I want to draw your attention to how the Covid-19 pandemic and the July 2021 uprising demonstrated how poorly prepared for an immediate crisis the state was. This is not a comparison of the two; instead, it illustrates how political conditions in South Africa are not conducive for responding to a crisis, let alone managing it. On the one hand, before the pandemic, our leaders had failed to craft effective responses to the challenges of unemployment, poverty and a declined economy. On the other hand, during the pandemic, the government failed to anticipate emergent issues that could be sparked by the lockdown – such as food insecurity, increasing poverty and an idle population without the bare necessities. Related to the pandemic-induced economic crisis is terrible management of the stimulus package meant to boost recovery. Secondly, the government’s diminishing ability to steer policy to solve enduring challenges and emerging crises was laid bare. Enduring challenges continue to endure South Africa has not had a clearly defined strategy of addressing the crisis of youth joblessness – not before Covid-19, nor subsequent to it. In the latter context, we know that evidence-based policy response is preferred over rhetoric. Furthermore, the July riots were a worrying sign of the connection between good governance, which in turn is crucial and a key enabler for government to implement programmes or create a conducive environment, and political stability. Read: Police and intelligence services failed to foresee, disrupt July riots, report says The diminished capacity of government to achieve its goals and the worsening socioeconomic conditions of the ordinary person creates a breeding ground for discontent. The two arguments show that the government has been suboptimal in steering policies that can revive the economy. For one thing, the managment of the stimulus package and the Covid-19 procurement process shows that politicians, their lack of care, and their ‘clientelist’ politics are the problem. The politicians have done both the government and the governed a profound disservice. Naturally, beyond the hype of the investment conference, there is profound disillusionment. Track record Already demonstrated in this article is the incessant news about corruption, bad governance and failure to steer policy such that it responds to periods of crisis. South Africa has a problem in that the worst of us are in government. So far, these leaders do not give the impression of creating a business-friendly environment, easing regulation, speeding up progressive legislation and managing billions committed to reviving the economy. The investment summit could, in theory, produce a one-time chance for remaking South Africa better for all. In reality, however, experience has taught us that our politicians will ensure that it fails. I hope to be proven wrong.