Country Garden Holdings Co. was upgraded by Jefferies after taking steps to bolster its balance sheet as a gauge of developer stocks rose for a second day. High-yield dollar notes gained as China’s biggest developer said it expects a rebound in the housing sector, adding the worst is over for housing policy tightening. Sales across China’s biggest markets remained weak in March however, tumbling 45%, according to Bloomberg Intelligence. Developers including Country Garden were given approval to sell bonds, as credit markets continue to reopen for the embattled sector. Several more developers are expected to report earnings Thursday after many firms delayed earnings releases. Key Developments: China’s cabinet vowed to stabilise the economy and called on officials to avoid measures that harm market expectations as the government struggles to control Covid outbreaks across the country including in the financial center of Shanghai. A State Council meeting led by Premier Li Keqiang on Wednesday called on the nation to prioritize stable growth and to draft contingency plans to deal with possible greater uncertainties, according to state-owned national broadcaster China Central Television. The meeting pledged to stick to the goals set for this year — including reaching about 5.5% growth — even though downward pressure on the economy is increasing.  Country Garden got approval to sell 5 billion yuan of notes on China’s interbank market, according to a statement from the National Association of Financial Market Institutional Investors. CIFI Holdings Group Co. and Longfor Group Holdings Ltd. were also given nods to sell 5 billion yuan of notes as the market slowly reopens for the sector. Chinese state-owned property firms have smashed their prior record for onshore bond sales this quarter while their private-sector peers continue to struggle raising new cash.  Country Garden Holdings jumped after China’s largest developer said it’s making progress on cutting debt and signaled better times ahead for the nation’s battered real estate sector, while rival China Vanke reported its first profit decline since the 2008 financial crisis. China’s housing market is likely to rebound and the worst is over for the country’s property policy tightening, Country Garden President Mo Bin said in a call following earnings Wednesday. Jefferies analyst Stephen Cheung raised the recommendation on Country Garden to buy from hold, with a price target of HK$7.38, implying a 21% increase. The developer was also upgraded at CGS-CIMB. Vanke, the nation’s largest developer by market value and the No. 2 by sales, reported its first profit slide in 13 years. Net income plunged 46% to 22.5 billion yuan ($3.54 billion), missing the 35.3 billion yuan estimate of analysts surveyed by Bloomberg. Revenue of 452.8 billion yuan also missed estimates. Chairman Yu Liang said the company is aiming for a profit rebound in 2022. Investors buying Chinese property stocks two weeks ago when the country’s top financial-policy body vowed to ensure capital-market stability made the correct bet. A gauge of Shanghai-listed real estate firms has surged 20% from March 15’s nadir, triple the gain for the Shanghai Composite Index. Measures to prop up flagging new-home sales and bolster what is still a vital part of China’s economy remain in focus as some cities take local efforts to boost activity. The central bank’s Shanghai branch Wednesday urged banks to support buyout activity in the sector.  © 2022 Bloomberg