 SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Victor Mupunga. You’ll find him at Old Mutual Wealth Private Client Securities – he is a senior analyst there. Victor, I  appreciate the early morning time. RMI results out recently. A mixed bag in a sense, although we see a lot of it because of course Momentum and Discovery are listed. We get some sight into that. But really this is, more than anything I suppose, perhaps around the sort of winding up, the unbundling of Discovery and Momentum, the exiting of Hastings and ultimately listing of OUTsurance. Listen/read: Schalk Louw of PSG Old Oak on holdcos PSG, RMI and Naspers/Prosus VICTOR MUPUNGA: Yeah. Morning, Simon, and thanks for having me. You’re right. The results were a bit of a mixed bag there and, as you rightly point out, I think we’d seen most of the results there. But OUTsurance results themselves were also a little bit messy if you recall last year, the distorted base, obviously because of the lockdowns and the consumers not being able to travel. So we had reduced claims frequency. A lot of that understandably reversed a little bit in the results here, where the claims frequency got back to normal. You’ve also seen inflation around the cost of vehicle repairs increasing, but that really is sort of a short-term blip. I think in terms of the OUTsurance business itself, it remains a very attractive business and, as you pointed out, I think it’s going to be a great opportunity for investors to now be able to invest directly in this business when it lists as a standalone unit. SIMON BROWN: Yeah. I think most of the listeners will know OUTsurance, whether they use the product or not. They’ve got short- and  long-term [insurance] in South Africa. They’ve also got OUTvest, which is a sort of investing platform. They’ve also got operations in Australia and New Zealand. Are they making much headway there? We’ve seen a lot of local companies really struggle in that part of the world. VICTOR MUPUNGA: Yes. I think we see OUTsurance as a great business. If you look at it from a consumer perspective, most of us will know that they have a significant market share in the short-term space, particularly in the vehicle-insurance market. But if you think of other lines of insurance – take life insurance, even here in the local market take business insurance – they remain quite underrepresented in that market. Those are the areas of the business where management have been investing quite significantly over the last few years. In the most recent results that they report, about 20% of their profits were reinvested into the business. So those are the different lines of insurance that I’m speaking about here. You mentioned Australia …. Over the last few years they’ve increased their broken network in that market, and now you’re starting to get quite a sizable business. I think in the most recent result, that was impacted to some extent by the adverse weather. That was a bit unexpected. But, as you’d expect with an insurance company, over time that clears out and, apart from Australia, they’re now speaking of other geographies as well. I think this is one of those companies that has actually managed to do well…… already in Australia. Let’s see what they have in store in terms of new geographies. We’re excited about this one. SIMON BROWN: Yeah. For RMI, their internal valuation of OUTsurance is just shy of R40 billion. Are you able to get enough insight via the results to get a sense of whether that seems a reasonable number? VICTOR MUPUNGA: Yes. To us it seems reasonable. I think we’ll get a little bit more information right in the coming months, once we look at it as a standalone business. But when we compare them to other standalone sort of insurance businesses that are listed in our market, that’s certainly not well out of kilter. Keep in mind this is a business that, apart from all the investing that they are doing in South Africa and in other geographies, is still able to sustain an 80% dividend payout ratio, with occasional special dividends as well. So we would actually expect it over time, once it’s listed as a separate entity, to trade at a premium compared to some of the insurers in our local markets. So [at] the current valuation we think, as a standalone business, we’ve got more in store for [them]. SIMON BROWN: Yeah. An 80% payout ratio –that is proper chunky. Back quickly, as a last question, to RMI itself. This kind of in many senses is the end of the road for RMI. It’s been [to] my sense a fairly successful holdco. We’ve seen some struggle but [with] the spinning out of Discovery, Momentum, as I mentioned, they’ve exited Hastings. OUTsurance is to go – a bit of an end of an era for our market. VICTOR MUPUNGA: Yeah. It is. I think it’s very difficult. I would imagine it would’ve been very difficult for management and the board over the last few months or year or so to make some of these decisions that they’ve made, because they certainly are shareholder-friendly. But it does speak to the end of the road for RMI. You still do have a few small businesses in there, the asset manager and the other smaller businesses, but they really don’t have scale. So it certainly is the end of the road. But, given what we’ve seen with the holdcos over the last few years in terms of the widening discounts, despite all the attempts by management to buy back shares, restructure, I think this is the right way to go. I think it’s becoming more and more difficult for management teams to justify the holdco structure. So hopefully this is another one and we’ll continue to see a few more for those that remain with the holding construction. SIMON BROWN: Yeah, for RMI shareholders it might be end of an era, but I think they they’ve done well out of it. OUTsurance – looking forward to that listing in the market. Victor Mupunga, Old Mutual Wealth Private Client Securities, where he as a senior analyst, I appreciate the early morning. Read: Robust Remgro recovery, as half-year Heps surges over 139%