 SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Yair Shimansky, CEO of Shimansky. We are talking diamonds. Yair, I appreciate the early morning time…. Let’s touch off first [with] the war that we are seeing in Ukraine-Russia. Is that impacting the supply of diamonds? Are they major producers much? YAIR SHIMANSKY: Simon, good morning to your listeners and to yourself. Russia produces about 30% of the world’s uncut diamonds, so it is definitely a major player. Most of the diamonds find their way into India. Once they’re polished, they’re not considered Russian diamonds any more because there’s a major transformation that has happened, from rough to polished. Having said that, due to the sanctions, a lot of US retailers, Western world retailers, are now demanding origin certification of the diamonds. They want to know where the diamonds have come from in order not to deal with Russian diamonds. So if the war continues – and we hope it won’t – for the next three, four months, which is about the cycle of an uncut diamond to polish[ing], it’ll definitely create an upward [movement] in prices. It’ll create a shortage and very strong demand from other producing countries like South Africa, Botswana, Canada and other countries that are also diamond producers. SIMON BROWN: These other countries such as South Africa, Botswana, Canada, as you mentioned, would they easily be able to pick up that slack? I know in the oil world the idea that you can quickly produce more oil is a nice theory, but in practice it’s not quite that easy. YAIR SHIMANSKY: Yeah. That’s a great question. So, unlike oil [where] you can turn on the tap, produce more oil and *** the price, diamonds are a finite source, and mining is behind the demand from consumers. So I think it’ll create basically a price increase, and at the same time countries like China or India that don’t really impose sanctions on Russia, will welcome those extra diamonds into their markets. It’s a very dynamic market, but South African diamonds are definitely now in the spotlight. The same as in Botswana, the same as in Canada. The demand is definitely on the rise, even for the long term, because the Russian invasion into Ukraine doesn’t look good in the eyes of the Western world. So people will opt to buy diamonds from those countries [whose ethics they approve of]. SIMON BROWN: When I think diamonds, I think of beauty, of jewellery, I think of Valentine’s Day, engagement rings and the like – more around the visual or love component. Is there an investment case here? You’ve spoken about prices potentially rising. Should investors be looking potentially at having diamonds in a portfolio? YAIR SHIMANSKY: Diamonds – you can almost divide diamonds into two categories: the emotional investment, when you buy to represent love and relationships and special moments; those diamonds you can buy at your local jewellery stores or jewellers. Investment diamonds are definitely in demand and on the rise. It is a different category, especially because it is a hard asset, it is very portable. If you look now, in the world there are a lot of billionaires from Russia and other places [whose] assets have been seized from their apartments, from frozen bank accounts. A diamond, you can put it in your pocket and literally make it portable anywhere in the world. It’s a very good store of value, especially in dollar terms. So they are great investments, but you really need to understand your investment strategy and which diamonds to invest in, compared to buying a diamond at a jewellery shop. SIMON BROWN: Yeah. An investment diamond I imagine would be polished; it wouldn’t be set, but polished – or would it even perhaps be uncut? YAIR SHIMANSKY: In South Africa, as a producing country, it is illegal for anyone unlicensed to hold an uncut diamond. So they are basically polished diamonds. They normally will be certified by an international laboratory, so you can go and sell it in Japan, in China and Dubai – anywhere the world. They are a great investment, but you really need to understand what you are buying and also your strategy. Like any investment, there are different diamonds for different strategies to meet your needs. SIMON BROWN: I take that point. You need to speak to someone who knows what they’re doing. Interestingly [they are] priced in dollars. So it does give you that that dollar hedge there. We’ll leave that there. I appreciate the early morning time, Yair Shimansky, CEO of Shimansky.