Another new addition to the Revix stable is set for Friday April 22 – Avalanche (AVAX) – a smart contract based cryptocurrency rivalling Ethereum, Solana and Polkadot. What are smart contracts? A smart contract refers to a computer programme that lives on the blockchain. These programmes automatically run or execute specific actions when predetermined conditions are met. The thing that makes this contract ‘smart’ is that, unlike a normal legal contract, there is no need for a third party to see if the conditions have been met or see the transaction through. The computer programme will verify if the smart contract conditions are met before execution. With the help of smart contracts, the blockchain network becomes a programmable platform that can host other applications — much like how apps work on your phone’s operating system. Smart contracts have become a game-changer in the cryptocurrency market and have created one of the biggest sectors in crypto, decentralised finance (DeFi). The rise of smart contract technology Altcoins have shown extraordinary growth over the past year as more people start to adopt and understand the technology behind them. You’ve most likely heard of the earlier smart contract based cryptocurrencies – like Ethereum, Solana, Polkadot – but the lesser-known smart contract players like Terra and Avalanche are actually the ones amassing massive gains and fixing many of the problems found in the earlier smart contract players. With a market value of $21 billion, Avalanche (AVAX) is the 10th largest crypto, which in itself is a remarkable achievement for an asset barely two years old. Since its inception, AVAX has returned over 1 900%, outperforming Bitcoin, which only returned 350% in the same period. Source: Revix What is Avalanche? AVAX is a blockchain protocol that has some clear advantages over competitors such as Ethereum. Those advantages are its scalability, security and decentralisation, the holy trifecta of any blockchain-based protocol. Like Ethereum, Avalanche supports smart contracts to run decentralised applications (dApps) on its network. Avalanche’s unique Proof of Stake (PoS) mechanism is relatively low in energy use (compared to Bitcoin mining, as an example). Its blockchain design is slick and efficient enough to handle Visa-type transaction speeds (and better), but at much lower costs, and without sacrificing decentralisation or security. Avalanche’s native token, AVAX, is required to power its ecosystem. It is essentially the currency needed to transact on the Avalanche blockchain, distribute system rewards, participate in governance (PoS allows crypto holders to vote on issues affecting the blockchain) and facilitate transactions on the network. Why invest in Avalanche?  Max your investment with zero fees! Invest in the Avalanche (AVAX) on the Revix platform between April 22 and May 8 2022 and you won’t be charged any buy-in fee. Head over to Revix now, open a new account in three easy steps, and invest in your future wealth. About Revix Revix brings simplicity, trust and great customer service to investing. Its easy-to-use online platform allows anyone to securely own the world’s top investments in just a few clicks. Revix guides new clients through the sign-up process to their first deposit and first investment. Once set up, most customers manage their own portfolio but can access support from the Revix team at any time. For more information, please visit www.revix.com. Brought to you by Revix. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.