RMB CEO James Formby believes the cost of wind and solar energy production is increased by local material content rules and should be waived. Import tariffs, such as those on imported steel, are making renewable energy even more expensive. In a statement issued on Tuesday, he said steel tariffs, a material component in renewable energy projects, should be waived to help lower the cost of solar and wind installations. “It would be preferable to let the market decide where it procures material for green energy projects rather than government trying to prescribe the minutiae of local manufacturing of key components,” said Formby. “The more local inputs are required, the higher the cost of energy production which means consumers are paying more for energy. Given the long term nature of these contracts, these costs are baked in for many years.” He said component parts are typically cheaper when imported and can be 20% to 50% cheaper than SA-made parts, due to production scale and that manufacturing renewable energy components is largely automated, thus fewer direct local jobs are created than one might think. “South Africa urgently needs a ‘megawatts first’ policy. The country faces a worst case scenario of 100 days of blackouts this winter, according to Eskom’s recent statement.” Read: Load shedding crisis as Eskom breakdowns hit record levels To address the severe generation shortfall which is set to grow as older coal-fired plans are retired, he said the goal of energy deregulation should be to get as much energy to the grid as quickly as possible and that reliable, cost-effective energy supply is the best way to build the economy and resilient local industries. Some progress, but more needed Formby said while he’s encouraged by the “profound progress” in energy deregulation in South Africa over the past year, he hopes for further advances, particularly around access to local electricity distribution grids to link private generators and consumers. “Mineral Resources and Energy minister Gwede Mantashe recently launched bid window 6 of the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement (REIPPP) programme, saying 2 600MW of power would be procured in addition to bid window 5, which will reach financial close expected at the end of April 2022. However, there are fears that the recent global increase in commodity and logistics costs will make it challenging for these projects to reach financial close at the tariff levels awarded. “Eskom also recently launched a bidding process for land in Mpumalanga where the intention is for private generators to lease these land parcels from Eskom and construct renewable energy plants adjacent to existing grid connection infrastructure. These generators would use the Eskom connection points and grid network to deliver power to private buyers across the country. It’s a good example of a quick and efficient way to get extra energy to the grid, without committing Eskom’s balance sheet or requiring government guarantees to secure long-term power contracts. “[I] also commend Operation Vulindlela, the project delivery unit in the Presidency, for reducing red tape on private electricity generation projects to help get them on the grid more quickly.” He said while government lifted the threshold for licensing exemption for private generation from 1MW to 100MW last year, projects must still register with the National Energy Regulator of SA and this intention should take place much faster than the traditional licensing process. Read: Companies can produce up to 100MW of power – Ramaphosa