Kaisa Group Holdings Ltd. dollar bonds rallied Wednesday after the defaulted developer unveiled a strategic tie-up with a state-controlled builder and one of China’s major bad-debt managers, as the government works to contain the sector’s cash crunch. Some notes were on pace for their biggest gains in months as Kaisa announced the pact with China Merchants Shekou Industrial Zone Holdings Co. and China Great Wall Asset Management Co. to develop real estate, tourism and other businesses in an area including Hong Kong and Macau. China’s state-controlled distressed-asset firms have been moving to support cash-strapped developers at the urging of policy makers in Beijing. While struggles will persist for distressed builders as refinancing channels remain shut, the Kaisa announcement and “more funding access though onshore bond issuances could mean overall sentiment toward the sector is turning,” Wonnie Chu, managing director of fixed income at Gaoteng Global Asset Management, told Bloomberg News on Monday. Elsewhere, China Evergrande Group has agreed to pay the adviser fees of a bondholder group working with the developer to restructure debt, according to people with knowledge of the agreement.  Key Developments: China’s local governments stepped up easing of home-buying rules in recent weeks after top policy makers vowed to support the struggling market. More than 60 municipal authorities loosened the regulations in the first quarter, according to a report from real-estate data firm China Index Holdings. They include four provincial capital cities that abandoned signature restrictions on how many residences households can own and how long they should hold properties before selling them. Institutional investors which publicly file their holdings trimmed exposure in March after adding $3.7 billion of dollar bonds in par value terms between early November and the end of February, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. The biggest investors in China’s junk property bonds reduced their exposure for the first time in months, a turning point after they previously doubled down through distress and default risks. The shift underscores how even long-term supporters of China’s beaten-down property bonds may be losing enthusiasm for bargain hunting. BlackRock Inc. cut $370 million last month to bring the value of its holdings, if calculated at par, to just under $5 billion. A Bloomberg gauge of Chinese real-estate firms gained as much as 4.1%, on pace for the highest since Feb. 21, extending a recent rally as more cities start easing property restrictions. China Fortune Land Development Co. jumped by the 10% daily limit after Wu Xiangdong resigned as chairman and chief executive officer. CIFI Holdings Group Co. rose as much as 7.8% and Logan Group Co. climbed 9.5%. Chinese high-yield dollar bonds were flat to 1 cent higher on the dollar Wednesday morning, according to credit traders, as the market looks for its longest winning streak since December 2020. Prices climbed for a seventh day Tuesday, according to a Bloomberg index. Kaisa’s dollar notes rallied after the firm said it signed a cooperation pact with other firms. Its 9.75% note due 2023 climbed 6.1 cents to 25.9 cents on the dollar, Bloomberg-compiled prices showed, set for the biggest gain since Oct. 18. Yuzhou Group Holdings Co. is in negotiations to sell a service apartment building in Hong Kong’s Mid-Levels for HK$620 million, Hong Kong Economic Times reports, citing people in the market. The report didn’t name the potential buyer for the 85-unit project located at 48 Caine Road. The average price of the units is around HK$20 000 per square foot. Evergrande agreed to pay the adviser fees of a bondholder group working with it to restructure debt, and to share more information with the creditors, according to people with knowledge of the agreement who asked not to be named discussing private deal talks. The creditors, advised by Moelis & Co. and Kirkland & Ellis, began to prepare for negotiations in October after Evergrande delayed interest payments on one of its offshore bonds and reported that certain asset-sale plans had collapsed. The Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee ruled that no auction will be held to settle credit-default swaps on Logan, according to a statement Monday. The panel previously ruled that swaps were triggered by a failure-to-pay credit event. The swaps covered a net $115.6 million of Logan’s debt as of March 11, according to the Depository Trust & Clearing Corp.