PSG Konsult has had a good run since its inception, as the annual results since its listing in 2014 have shown. The latest results, for the year to end February 2022, show that continued good investment returns for clients attracted more clients and more funds, which boosted income during the last financial year. While the 32% increase in recurring headline earnings per share during the last year is commendable, CEO Francois Gouws points out that earnings have grown steadily every year over the last 10 years and that this is testament to the group’s advice-led business model. “PSG Konsult’s strong results over the last decade highlight the benefits of being an advice-led firm,” he says. “Our entrepreneurial culture, empowerment and accountability allow us to attract talent and grow client relationships through integrity, trust and transparency.” “The success of this approach is evidenced by the fact that our Wealth business generated R20.6 billion in net inflows during the year under review, even in a challenging environment,” adds Gouws. Read: PSG Konsult keeps growing “The group’s advisor network is formidable, and our high calibre advisor base continues to expand. In addition, our sustained investment in digital capabilities enables this advisor network to maintain excellent client service levels.” It also helps to be right about the market Gouws said in a one-on-one interview with Moneyweb that PSG backed South African shares during the last year or two. He notes that the motivation was that SA companies were generally undervalued. “It took courage,” he says, during a period in which it seemed that the whole of SA just wanted to move all their money offshore. Meanwhile, international technology stocks declined significantly and the rand strengthened remarkably. People noticed, and assets under management increased by 19% – R76 billion – to R468 billion at the end of February. Gouws says that while the increase in share prices made a contribution to the increase in managed assets, PSG Konsult attracted new business, with around half of the growth in assets coming from new inflows. Earnings contributors The bulk of the increase in earnings came from PSG Asset Management, where headline earnings increased by R140 million to above R244 million, compared to just below R105 million in the previous financial year. The largest division, PSG Wealth, increased earnings by 14% to R510 million. Gouws says all the businesses in the group performed well. “During a difficult year, all three operating divisions [PSG Wealth, PSG Asset Management and PSG Insure] achieved growth in both top line revenue and recurring headline earnings.” PSG Wealth’s managed client assets increased by 17% over the prior year, with net inflows of R20.6 billion in managed assets recorded. “This is proof of the strong investment performance for clients, and our ability to advise clients to focus on their long-term goals, especially during volatile and uncertain times,” says Gouws. PSG Insure reported stable results in terms of gross written premiums and net revenues. Management attributes the results to its ongoing focus on profitable growth with an emphasis on commercial lines type of business, which requires advisor expertise which PSG Konsult sees as core to its advice-led approach. PSG Asset Management also delivered strong results, growing assets under administration to nearly R174 billion, an increase of 22% over the previous year. Gouws points out that the asset management division maintained its performance and once again achieved top quartile investment performance, enabling it to deliver leading investment returns for clients, who particularly benefitted from the division’s long-term SA Inc stock views. The PSG Income Fund achieved first place as the best South African Interest-Bearing Short-term Fund on a risk adjusted basis over five years at the 2021 Raging Bull Awards. Read: PSG to unbundle its investments and delist Analyst’s view Meyrick Barker, investment analyst at Camissa Asset Management, says PSG Konsult delivered good results. “Given that a large portion of fees are a function of the value of assets managed and administrated by the Wealth and Asset Management operations, profits are linked to the general level of financial markets. “The strong recovery in markets over the past year, supported by continued positive net flows into the wealth business, contributed to delivering high annual earnings growth,” says Barker, mentioning that the asset management business outperformed the market and earned more in performance fees. Dividend Not only did PSG Konsult’s clients benefit from good returns, shareholders did too. Directors approved a generous dividend: “In light of the group’s confidence in its prospects, it declared a final dividend of 22 cents per share. The overall dividend declared for the year of 32 cents per share is up 31% over the previous financial year.” In addition to the odd R400 million to be paid as dividends in relation to the 2022 financial year, PSG Konsult also returned R110 million to shareholders by way of share buybacks. The share price itself did well too. The current price of R14 is just below the annual high of R15.23 and more than 50% higher than its low of below R10 in 2021. Gouws says PSG Konsult is positioned to perform well for clients and shareholders in years to come, even in volatile and challenging markets. 