E-House (China) Enterprise Holdings Ltd. is unlikely to secure enough funds to pay debt maturing next week, while Country Garden Holdings Co. bonds jumped on a report it’s assessing interest in a debt sale. Developer stocks rose on expectations China will cut interest rates to bolster the economy. The offshore China credit market stabilised Thursday, with junk dollar bonds trading flat to one cent higher, according to traders. A gauge of property stocks rose as much as 2.2%, for a second straight gain. Longfor Group Holdings Ltd. jumped as much as 2.5% after winning listing approval in Hong Kong for its property management unit. An initial public offering of Longfor Intelligent Living Ltd. could raise about $1 billion, according to people familiar with the matter, who asked not to be identified as the information is private. E-House (China) Enterprise is unlikely to secure the requisite funds to repay dollar notes maturing on April 18, according to an exchange filing. A default on the 2022 notes will occur if the bond isn’t repaid on maturity, according to the statement. The company continues to explore ways to secure the funds. According to a March 31 announcement, the outstanding amounts of the 2022 notes and 2023 bond are $298.2 million and $300 million respectively. China Evergrande Group and China Vanke Co. are among E-House shareholders, according to exchange filings. Chinese stocks rose as expectations grew that the central bank may cut its key policy interest rate, boosting sentiment among investors who are waiting on authorities to take more steps to revive growth. China’s central bank is expected to cut its key policy interest rate for the second time this year on Friday and reduce the reserve requirement ratio within days to help bolster a faltering economy under strain from Covid lockdowns. Fifteen of the 20 economists surveyed by Bloomberg predict the People’s Bank of China will lower the interest rate on one-year policy loans — 11 of them forecast a 10 basis-point reduction to 2.75% and four expect a 5-point drop. The rest see no change.  Country Garden is assessing investor interest ahead of a potential sale of 1 billion yuan ($157 million) in bonds, REDD reported, citing a source close to China’s largest developer by sales. The proposed notes would mature in 2026 and be puttable in 2024, with an indicative coupon range of 4.6%–5.8%, according to the report. The developer’s 7.25% dollar bond due in 2026 jumped 2 cents to 74.6 cents on the dollar, set for the biggest jump in a week, according to Bloomberg-compiled prices. The 6.5% dollar note maturing in 2024 jumped 4.3 cents to 83.7 cents China’s offshore high-yield credit reached a critical juncture, falling back again in recent days after key metrics showed stress reaching record levels earlier in March. Distress in the nation’s $870 billion offshore debt market remained at the highest level, a tracker shows. Onshore stress levels moved up a notch.