JSE-listed technology services company EOH Holdings announced plans to sell-off its wholly-owned subsidiary Hymax to telecommunications giant Seacom’s South African business for R144.9 million on Thursday. The proceeds of the sale are set to go largely towards cutting the company’s debt. Read:
EOH may go to shareholders to raise cash
Africa’s broadband use prompts doubling for Seacom network In a Sens statement EOH says that the sale of the Hymax business forms part of its over two-year-long targeted disposals strategy aimed at not only combating its current capital constraints, but also creating a fit-for-purpose capital structure. “I believe that Seacom, as a leading ICT and internet connectivity supplier for African enterprises, will provide a compelling opportunity for value unlock for EOH-NS and Hymax both for existing and future clients and the transferring employees,” EOH group CEO Stephan van Coller says in a statement. “The embedded relationships that exist between our customers and other EOH business units will remain as is and the EOH Infrastructure Services business is positioned to benefit from the transaction as we leverage the Seacom connectivity expertise,” he adds. EOH’s share price gained more than 5% in morning trade, following confirmation of the Hymax disposal deal. Seacom group CEO Oliver Fortuin says the Hymax acquisition aligns with Seacom’s growth strategy and that the deal will help transform the business into a “converged telecommunications provider across Africa”. “By expanding our on-net capabilities and reach with this acquisition and the acquisition of Hirani Telecom and Africell Uganda’s infrastructure, Seacom aims to provide customers with comprehensive enterprise-grade ICT solutions and quality connectivity,” Fortuin adds. Deal subject to conditions The sale, which is expected to take between three- and five months to allow for certain sale conditions to be met, is anticipated to be concluded on or before August 31 this year. Some of the required conditions include an unconditional approval from the competition authorities as well as obtaining approval from both the Seacom and EOH boards and shareholders. Other transaction conditions include: