A Chinese developer has been sued by a Singapore bank over a loan-repayment demand, in the latest sign that creditors to the nation’s distressed property firms are growing increasingly impatient. Oversea-Chinese Banking Corp. filed a claim against Shimao Group Holdings Ltd. and a unit regarding a revolving credit facility agreed to in October, according to a Hong Kong court filing last week by OCBC. Elsewhere, China Evergrande Group’s onshore unit will next week meet with holders of a yuan bond to vote on a proposed interest payment extension. After another rough week for Chinese financial markets, focus is on what steps policy makers may take next. Optimism generated by last month’s sweeping pledges from Beijing has continued to falter. A Bloomberg Intelligence gauge of developer shares rose 0.5% on Friday afternoon after four consecutive days of declines.  Oversea-Chinese Banking Corp. filed a claim against Shimao and a unit regarding a revolving credit facility agreed to in October, according to a Hong Kong court filing last week by OCBC. After demanding repayment of $100 million plus interest in January from the unit, which borrowed the funds, principal of $49.2 million had yet to be repaid by March 2 and the bank is seeking that amount plus interest, the filing said. Luxury builder Shimao had long been considered one of China’s healthier property firms, and its mounting debt problems have been seen as a bellwether for financial contagion in the nation’s embattled property industry. The slump in Chinese equities and corporate bonds is paring a rebound which lasted for a couple weeks from mid March and that was sparked by vows for policy action. But patience for more details is wearing thin, intensifying growing capital outflows. Any renewed rally ahead could only be sustained if concrete and significant policy steps were taken rapidly, according to Jean-Louis Nakamura, the chief investment officer for the Asia Pacific region at Lombard Odier. Times China Holdings Ltd. has repaid a dollar bond which was due Wednesday, the Chinese developer told Bloomberg in a written statement Friday. There was $166.8 million of principal outstanding, according to compiled data. The company also has a dollar note maturing April 26, with $175.4 million outstanding. Hengda Real Estate Group Co., Evergrande’s onshore unit, will hold a meeting on April 25-26 with holders of its 8.2 billion yuan bond to vote on proposal for repayment extension, Hengda said in a filing. The proposal would extend interest payment for the period between April 27, 2021, and April 26, 2022, by six months until Oct. 27 The developer’s onshore unit will delay repaying most of a 627 million yuan asset-backed security tranche by a year, according to a filing to the Shanghai Stock Exchange’s private disclosure system. The proposal was to pay accrued interest and 10% of the principal on Friday’s original maturity date, with the balance to be delivered on April 22, 2023, the document said.