 RYK VAN NIEKERK: Dr Roelof Botha joins me now. He is of course the well-known economist. He’s an economic advisor to the Optimum Group, and he also teaches economics at Gibs (Gordon Institute of Business Science). He also compiles the Altron Fintech Household Resilience Index, and this index has shown that there [was] a good recovery in most economic sectors in the fourth quarter of last year. The index shed light on the financial health of South African households in general, and their ability to cope with debt. Roelof, thank you so much for this early morning. The index shows consumers are slowly but surely recovering from the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic. Can you put the findings of the index for the fourth quarter into some perspective? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Yes, absolutely. Thank you. And good morning. It was marginally disappointing, if I can put it that way, in the sense that we had hoped that the index would reach a higher level than in the fourth quarter of 2019. Why the fourth quarter of 2019? That’s the last comparable quarter before the pandemic set in. It hasn’t even fully recovered from the fourth quarter of 2020, and also not from the fourth quarter of 2019. Obviously there is an improvement over the second quarter of 2020. That was the first Covid quarter, and in that quarter you could have been arrested. I was almost arrested [when] just running on my lawn on the outside of my house. It was frightening. If you are by law not allowed to open your business, then you can imagine what happens. So it’s substantially up from there, and our analysis shows that this is still a price that we are paying – not for Covid, but for what happened in this country in the third quarter, in July specifically, last year, during that apparently politically instigated event (riots in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal). I personally am desperately hoping that some of the perpetrators of that violence and looting will be arrested soon. RYK VAN NIEKERK: I’m looking at the graph of the index and, and it looks very similar to graphs of say, economic growth. You see a steady plodding along until the first quarter of 2020, when the lockdown hit us. Then there was a massive dip, but there also has been a brisk recovery. Now it seems to be plodding along again – and that’s also the expectation for the economic growth rate, for example. Do you expect the same for this resilience index of household finances? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Yes. Once again, we are hoping that the shift in policy will have a positive effect on the index pattern. It is a pretty complicated index. It has 20 different indicators and they are weighted. By far the biggest weighting is for private-sector salaries, followed by public-sector salaries, and also employment in the public and private sectors. Unfortunately, I personally believe that if we had a more accurate figure for the total informal-sector employment in South Africa, then this index would have had a slightly better showing, if not a moderately better showing. As it is, I personally don’t think that the [Statistics] SA surveys remotely capture the huge informal settlements that are developing. I’m just thinking personally of The Letlhabile Maboloka area that I travel through every week. Letlhabile is becoming a mega city [with] hardware stores, an incredible amount of activity, [with] restaurants – on one corner I think I counted seven restaurants – and I can guarantee [to] the listeners that nobody from Stats SA has a clue what’s going on there. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Yes. I think if you look around you do see a lot of economic activity, but if you look at the official numbers of Stats SA, it doesn’t seem to reflect all that well. But you get, what, ‘lies, bloody lies, and statistics’, as they say. But just lastly, one of the significant changes between 2020 and today is interest rates. We saw a significant decline of interest rates shortly after the lockdown started, and now we are entering a new upward interest-rate cycle. Do you think that will have a significant impact on consumers going forward? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Unfortunately, yes. One of the star performers in the Altron Fintech Index, the second-best performer over a two-year period pre-Covid, same quarter, and also one of the top performers since the inception in 2014, and also on a year-on-year basis, has been the ratio of household income to household debt, the costs of servicing your debt – in other words, interest that you pay. That was encouraging. Unfortunately, because the Reserve Bank has now returned to a restrictive monetary policy stance, because apparently they want to scare the living daylights out of the oil producers globally so that they can pump more oil, because that is the only reason why South Africa’s inflation rate has been ticking up. That is the main reason by a long shot – and how they figure the causality for that one is beyond me. It is not necessary to raise interest rates in this country at this point in time. Once there is peace in Ukraine – and that’s around the corner with a bit of luck, I think we are hoping and praying for that – the Russians will have no option but to pump oil like it’s going out of fashion; they’ve got no forex left. The oil price will hopefully within a couple of months from now come tumbling down, and so will our inflation trend. So it’s a knee-jerk reaction. I’m trying to be diplomatic, but it’s not very bright of the Reserve Bank. RYK VAN NIEKERK: We’ve heard earlier from Matete Thulare from Rand Merchant Bank that there is some indication and talk within the US that there may be a 75 basis-point hike in the US. How such an aggressive interest-rate increase in the US impact us? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Directly, as far as I’m concerned, there would be hardly any impact. There may be a couple of moves in international capital markets. The rand may take a marginal knock, [but] it’ll come right back because, whatever they do there, our current 10-year bond yield is just so attractive, especially because of the shift in economic policy in South Africa. One can see that also in our foreign direct investment. The four-year average inflow of foreign direct investment [has been] at an all-time record high since Cyril Ramaphosa took over and started moving away from state capture and wholesale corruption in the public sector. But it’s taking time. You can also see that in the Fitch and Moody’s upgrading of our outlook – not of our rating, but certainly of our outlook –which is really good news. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Roelof, thank you so much for your early morning. That was Dr Roelof Botha. He is an economic advisor to the Optimum Group, and he also compiles the Altron Fintech Household Resilience Index. Listen to the full MoneywebNOW podcast every weekday morning here.