Russia’s military targeted regions in Ukraine’s south and east overnight for shelling, with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy saying Moscow has begun a new campaign to conquer the Donbas area in the east of the country. The US is looking to re-establish a diplomatic presence in Ukraine and the European Union is considering ways to finance the reconstruction of the war-ravaged country. Washington is also preparing to train some Ukrainians outside the country on howitzer artillery pieces in the coming days to help them fight back at home. All times CET: Russia’s navy has moved almost 200 km (125 miles) away from Ukraine shores, according to the Ukrainian military. That’s after the recent sinking of its flagship Black Fleet missile cruiser Moskva. Russian ships are still impeding Ukrainian navigation, it said. At the same time, Russian troops are enforcing air defenses near Kharkiv in the northeast, while local officials said there were explosions overnight in the Dnipro region in central Ukraine and Mykolayiv in the south. The mayor of the Russian-occupied southern city of Kherson, Ihor Kolykhayev, wrote to Ukrainian leaders asking for guidance on how to operate, Ukrainska Pravda reported. “Ukraine’s government bodies have stopped functioning in Kherson,” Kolykhayev said in the letter, the outlet reported. The European Union is planning to establish a solidarity trust fund to finance Ukraine’s reconstruction as member states were told they should expect to pay the bulk of the costs. The topics of postwar reconstruction and possible war reparations are expected to garner attention over the next weeks as senior officials in Brussels and Washington plan to discuss ways to support Kyiv financially and ensure the enormous amount of money isn’t misused, EU officials said. The US won’t test some anti-satellite weapons in space. The move comes after Moscow blew up a dead satellite last November with a ground-launched missile. The resulting debris raised concern that orbiting space junk could endanger the International Space Station or threaten commercial spacecraft. The ban would prevent test debris from damaging other satellites and reduce the chances of conflict between nations in space,  the office of Vice President Kamala Harris said. Japan’s government plans to provide Ukraine with drones, gas masks and protective gear against chemical weapons, Kyodo News reported, citing an unidentified person. Japan previously sent bullet-proof vests, helmets and other supplies to support Ukraine against the Russian invasion. Zelenskiy, in his nightly video address Monday, said “It can now be stated that Russian troops have begun the battle for Donbas, for which they have been preparing for a long time.” “In the east and south of our country, the occupiers are recently trying to attack in a little more thought-out manner than before,” Zelenskiy said. “They are putting pressure, looking for a weak spot in the defense of our state to go there with the main forces.” Russian forces were already shelling the area heavily. Russia has been assembling large numbers of troops in eastern Ukraine for weeks even as it pulled out of areas near Kyiv. Moscow has not announced the start of a major offensive. The US wants to re-establish a diplomatic presence in Ukraine as soon as possible, State Department spokesman Ned Price said in Washington. But he didn’t say when that could happen, citing the safety of American diplomats as a priority. “When the security situation allows it, and not a second later, I can assure you that we will have a re-established diplomatic presence on the ground in Ukraine,” Price said. Spain plans to join European Union allies in reopening its embassy in Kyiv soon, Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez told Antena 3 television. The European Union reopened its mission in Kyiv just over a week ago after Russian troops retreated from the region, though the capital has come under fire again in recent days. The Russian military said it destroyed a facility in the Lviv region that held weapons shipped to Ukraine from the US and other countries, according to Interfax. Pentagon spokesman John Kirby told reporters he couldn’t immediately confirm that such an attack occurred. Also Monday, four missiles hit Lviv, killing seven people, the first civilians killed in the western city, Mayor Andriy Sadovyi said. Eleven others were injured. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen won’t automatically boycott meetings of the Group of 20’s finance ministers this week in Washington if Russian officials attend, the U.S. said Monday. Yellen will avoid some sessions but will participate in others focused on the economic fallout from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Earlier this month Yellen had said US officials wouldn’t take part in some G-20 meetings this year in which Russia is allowed to participate. Russia has sent reinforcements to eastern Ukraine for renewed offensive in the region, a senior US defense official told reporters. Russia has added about 11 battalion tactical groups, bringing its total in the country to about 76, the person said. The US is preparing to train some Ukrainians outside the country on howitzer artillery pieces in the coming days, the official said. The official contended that sanctions have limited Russia’s ability to restock and resupply components for some of its military systems including precision-guided missiles. Citing “mass heroism and valour” but making no mention of Russia’s war in Ukraine, the decree Putin signed awarded the 64th Motorised Infantry Brigade the honorary title of Guards. Ukraine’s Defense Ministry previously identified the unit as one involved in war crimes during the occupation of Bucha, a town outside Kyiv that has drawn international attention for reports of Russian atrocities. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment. Sergei Sobyanin cited the impact of foreign companies shutting down operations in Russia in a post on his blog Monday, and pledged special subsidies for those affected. Over 750 foreign companies have curtailed or suspended operations in Russia since the invasion of Ukraine, according to economists at Yale University. Russia’s economy has withstood unprecedented sanctions pressure and the situation is stabilizing, Putin said. In a televised meeting with officials, the Russian leader highlighted the rise in the ruble and said fiscal policy must actively support the economy by maintaining liquidity. According to Bloomberg Economics, capital controls have steadied Russia’s financial sector and propped up the ruble, but a recession triggered by the sanctions is likely to be deep and prolonged. © 2022 Bloomberg