Stocks were mixed and bond yields rose on Wednesday as investors weighed inflation risks against the start of the earnings season. Europe’s Stoxx 600 was little changed, while US equity futures rose. The dollar ticked up and the yen declined. Oil slipped after Russian President Vladimir Putin vowed to continue the war in Ukraine and China partially eased Covid curbs. Markets continued to digest Tuesday’s US inflation data, as a smaller-than-expected jump in the core gauge, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, prompted traders to pare back expectations on how aggressively the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates. UK inflation surged to 7% last month, a fresh three-decade high and the last reading before the Bank of England’s next decision on May 5. Investors are now turning their attention to the earnings season while awaiting the European Central Bank’s meeting on Thursday. Investors are bracing for the latest earnings season as they evaluate the threat from inflation, amid concerns that rising commodity costs and more circumspect consumers will end up squeezing company profits. “We’re hopeful that this is where it’s going to peak,” Ann Miletti, head of active equity at Allspring Global Investments, said on Bloomberg Television, referring to US inflation. But she added that markets continue to face a wall of worry, ranging from rising rates to the impact of China’s Covid lockdowns. Fed Governor Lael Brainard said the US central bank will move “expeditiously” to raise rates to a level that neither stimulates nor slows the economy this year. She said a decision on paring the Fed balance sheet could come as soon as May, with reductions starting in June.  Richmond Fed President Thomas Barkin said rates should reach the neutral range as quickly as possible and can move above that should price pressures persist. The “inflation report on balance validates expectations that the Fed will hike by 50 basis points in May,” Silvia Dall’Angelo, senior economist at Federated Hermes Ltd., wrote in a note. New Zealand implemented a half-point interest-rate rise — its biggest in 22 years — again highlighting the trend of sharp monetary tightening across a range of economies grappling with price pressures. But the nation’s bonds rallied as traders reassessed how much tightening might lie ahead. On the geopolitical front, the presidents of Poland and the three Baltic states are heading to Kyiv in a show of support that follows the visits of other leaders to the Ukrainian capital, including from Boris Johnson and European Union chiefs. The Biden administration is preparing a new military assistance package for Ukraine. Top oil trader Vitol Group said it intends to completely stop trading Russia-origin crude and products by the end of this year. Events to watch this week: Some of the main moves in markets: