State-run power utility Eskom plans to scale back on its planned maintenance in the forthcoming winter season in an attempt to lessen the probability of load shedding in the cold months. This was confirmed by Eskom executives, including group CEO Andre de Ruyter, during a media briefing on Tuesday. Read:
Stage 2 load shedding amid a cold snap
Winter worries: Eskom defers Koeberg steam generator replacement to August 2023 It follows Eskom’s abrupt load shedding announcement on Monday after the breakdown of four generation units. These included separate units from the Matla and Kriel power stations and two units at the Camden power station. Eskom’s CEO Andre de Ruyter says that the heavy rain and subsequent flooding in KwaZulu-Natal contributed to challenges in operational performance. He indicated that the utility is looking at opportunities to alleviate pressures on the system as teams wait for flood waters to subside before restoring electricity in water-logged areas. De Ruyter further highlighted the persistent challenge of balancing the maintenance of units while keeping enough power available on the grid to avoid load shedding. “It’s difficult to give a very firm outlook on load shedding. Given [the] maintenance backlog, there remains a risk of load shedding going forward.” Read:
Eskom scrutinising emergency power contracts as cuts ongoing
SA’s economic growth affected by mismatch of electricity supply and demand According to the utility’s national control manager, Gavin Hurford, Eskom’s scenario planning has predicted the loss of up to 15 000MW which translate to 100 days of load shedding in the upcoming winter season. Hurford says that although this is an extreme possibility, load shedding during evening peaks should be expected. Meanwhile, De Ruyter says that Eskom’s maintenance turnaround plan, which includes ensuring a reliable supply of electricity, remains a crucial priority. However, he adds that Eskom continues to struggle with implementation of the plan due to a lack of capacity and financial constraints. “The energy availability factor has [also] dropped because we’ve run our plants too hard, and we haven’t done the required maintenance.” The utility has encouraged private entities to pursue self-generating projects in collaboration with Eskom to onboard additional megawatts onto the national grid. Eskom confirmed on Tuesday morning that Stage 2 load shedding will be implemented from 17:00 until 5:00 on Wednesday because of three generating units that tripped at the Camden power station. In a statement, Eskom said that “this supply situation will persist throughout the week, with the possibility that more load shedding is likely to be implemented should the generation capacity deteriorate further.” Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern