 SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Craig Antonie from AnBro Capital. Among their funds they’ve got their tech Unicorn Fund. Craig, I appreciate the very early morning time. Congrats on the Salta award last week. Let’s go to January where [for] tech in general, the Nasdaq, it was a very, very tough month. The fund is down 20%, indices down almost the same amount. As a fund manager, how do you manage that sort of drawdown? Is it doubling down on the research, is it frankly ignoring price, which never tells us much about business or about valuations? CRAIG ANTONIE: Well, good morning, Simon, good morning to you and your listeners. Thanks so much for the congratulations. Really grateful for that. Yes, it’s been a pretty brutal January for markets I suppose as a whole, and tech stocks in particular. As soon as the onset of inflation and the need for higher interest rates became apparent, techs fell from flavour of the day to pretty much zero, to very low interest. As you likely said, we’ve seen a massive drawdown across the space. I think with regard to how we manage those drawdowns the first thing to think about is, when you have pullbacks like this after massive rallies, they are entirely normal. These are the sort of things that do happen in markets. So it’s important to keep a cool and calm head when this does happen. At the end of the day, you’ve just got to make sure that you are sticking to the right sort of businesses. You want those companies that make sure they have relevance in the world, that have strong balance sheets, good growth prospects. You stick to your knitting and you stick to the plan. Often though, when markets do get a bit heavy and they look a little bit expensive, the one way you can manage the risk in the portfolios is to boost your cash balances. Fortunately, going into this market sell-off, we were at maximum cash allowable in the unit trust, which is 20% of your ……2:15. Fortunately we had that cash, which not only acts as a shock absorber to falling markets, but also provides you with a bit of ammunition when markets do fall and you can then be a bit more selective in how you want to allocate that to your best ideas. SIMON BROWN: Yeah. I take that. You’re sitting on, an opportune time to be sitting on cash because, as I said, [it’s] the same company perchance just suddenly at a different price. We have seen a bit of a recovery in some tech stocks, some more than others, but we’re still seeing head scratches. I don’t know if you hold Zoom, but it’s a stock that is basically back at pre-pandemic levels, yet I seem to recall they’ve increased the number of users – 20x or 30x. There must be some stocks you’re looking at and thinking these are significant opportunities. CRAIG ANTONIE: Yes. And glad you actually brought up Zoom. Zoom has become a classic example of how Covid-19 has divided investors. During the pandemic it was considered an essential service, an essential company. Everyone thought it was the next thing since sliced bread. And now some people are wondering if it’s got any future ahead of it at all as Covid starts leaving us and the world starts coming back to normal. Well, I think the important thing to remember with a company like Zoom is it had a model and it had a place in the world before Covid even appeared on the horizon. It was already a fast-growing and thriving business before all of that, and if it had a place in the world before shutdowns and work from home became a thing, it certainly has a place in the world now where, if you look at something like a recent Gartner Survey that came out, they reckon that in the US alone in 2022, about 53% of the workforce will be remote working. In the UK and Europe that’s as much as, say, 50%; in the UK, 37% and 33%-odd percent in Germany and France. So, yes, Zoom became flavour of the day; now no one wants it. But to your point of rising users and that, if one looks at the numbers – and I think the important thing is when you look at company performance over the long run, two things are really responsible for what a share price does. The first is your growth in revenue, and the second thing is your growth in profits. Before Covid hit, Zoom had revenue of about $600 million as at the end of January. This year results came out and that revenue is up to $4.1 billion. Net income at the same time, before Covid, was $21.8 million and now it’s $1.4 billion. So you have a business where revenue has grown exponentially, profits are growing – and then they have free cash flow of $130 billion and over $5 billion in cash on the balance sheet. Yes, growth is potentially going to slow after this whole Covid thing, but at the end of the day the relevance of a business like that isn’t going to disappear. If anything, you have seen a situation where the proof is in the pudding and people may realise now that you need a company like that. But yes, there’s been a heck of a lot of that that’s happened. There’s been a lot of shifting in prices and valuations and all that kind of thing. As an example, I was looking at a table which really looks at consumer staple companies versus, say, consumer discretionary growth stocks. You’ll be surprised to hear that, Simon, at the moment a basket of those stocks is actually valued higher than some of the bigger quintessential growth stocks in the world. For example, if you look at something like Colgate Palmolive growing revenue at an average of 4% per annum, compare that to Microsoft at 13% per annum. Colgate Palmolive has a free cashflow margin of 17[%]. Microsoft has that of 34[%], yet they are valued the same on the same multiple. A basket of those will show very similar results. So growth and tech stocks are out of vogue at the moment, but the future is definitely I think where they’re at, and we are pretty comfortable with that strategy and sort of battening down the hatches and fighting through this and looking forward to a strong future. SIMON BROWN: I like that. ‘Out of vogue’ is often the opportunity. As you point out, you’re buying Zoom for the same price. It’s a fundamentally bigger company. Yeah, we might be using a little bit less of it, but there are folks such as me who had never Zoomed in my life, and now it’s a regular feature of my week. Craig Antonie, AnBro Capital, talking tech and opportunity there, as always I appreciate the time. Listen to the full MoneywebNOW podcast every weekday morning here.