The term ‘financial freedom’ rolls off the tongue quite easily, but it is not necessarily as easy to define or to achieve in practice. Achieving and maintaining financial freedom is a process and an ongoing journey of discipline, for which there are unfortunately no shortcuts. That said, you are not alone in understanding and getting the right products to support you on this journey. This article explores the key areas to understand in order to achieve financial freedom. This includes making the right choices with regard to planning, products and investments, all of which must be underpinned by a disciplined approach. Defining financial freedom for yourself Before getting into the details, it is useful to start by defining what financial freedom means to you. This is crucial, as it has different meanings for each individual, and the way you define it will set the scene for the decisions you need to make. For one person, financial freedom may simply mean being able to afford regular travel, for another it could mean the ability to afford quality education for their children. In its simplest form, achieving financial freedom means taking ownership of one’s financial position and having the ability to achieve one’s goals through all phases of life. Key decisions start with a plan Once you’ve defined what financial freedom means to you, the next step is to assess where you are now – relative to where you want to be. Draw up the landscape of your current financial position in respect of the following factors: With the help of your advisor, you can then develop a plan by: Choosing the right products along your financial freedom journey Financial products alone do not pave the way to financial freedom. Instead, they provide the means to achieve financial freedom by helping you accumulate and preserve wealth. The table below highlights the key features of a variety of financial products to help you make more informed product choices that are suitable for your needs. · The most important aspect of these products that one needs to understand is that it is crucial to start contributions as early as possible. · Contributions to these products are tax deductible and all the returns on these products are tax exempt. · Access to capital in these products is limited, which makes them effective products for preserving capital.  Tip: Growth assets are often the most suitable underlying investments in these products.  · The amount you can invest in these products is subject to contribution limits of R36 000 a year and R500 000 over your lifetime. · TFSAs can be used to support financial freedom in retirement or provide efficient tax-free savings for other purposes, including saving for education or unforeseen events.  Reminder: Your ability to access all your endowment savings is limited in the first five years. · The benefits of living annuities are generally optimised by having a financial advisor to help manage fund allocations and withdrawal rates on an ongoing basis. · It is very important to control annual income withdrawals from these products. Withdrawing too much can rapidly deplete capital over time.  Tip: With the increase in longevity risk resulting from a longer life expectancy, it is important to consider continued investment in growth assets within your living annuity. · A PSG Wealth financial advisor can give you the necessary guidance and access to our market-leading PSG Wealth Solutions unit trust funds. These funds are designed to support the above mentioned products and to achieve optimal client outcomes in relation to return and risk. · If you prefer investing directly in shares, you need to ensure that you understand the risks involved, in particular the risk of limited diversification across shares. ·  Consider appointing a financial advisor with the necessary qualifications to manage a share portfolio on your behalf. Monitor your decisions regularly As your financial freedom journey develops, you may need to adjust your plan accordingly. Revise your decisions, but always stick to the basic principle of financial discipline. A financial advisor can help you understand what you need to consider to achieve financial freedom, guide you in making more informed financial choices, and help you keep your plan and investment products on track. Jan van der Merwe is head of Actuarial and Product at PSG Wealth.