Parliament has reduced the number of free flights for former ministers and their spouses to a total of 12 per annum (that they can use individually or between them), saving up to R39 million a year in taxpayers’ money. Former ministers were previously allocated 48 free flights per year and their spouses 24. Thus there’s a total cut from at most 72 flights a year to 12. Under the new rules, former politicians are entitled to economy instead of business class tickets. They will also only have access to the benefit for five years post-retirement instead of the lifetime of free flights they were previously entitled to. The new travel policy for former members of parliament was instituted on March 30 by National Assembly Speaker Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula and National Council of Provinces chair Amos Masondo, replacing post-retirement benefits previously provided by the Ministerial Handbook. Impact According to the DA MP Leon Schreiber, who initiated the move, a retired minister who used their full annual allocation under the previous regime would cost taxpayers R384 000 a year while their spouse – if they used all 24 assigned tickets – would cost an additional R192 000. A deputy minister – assigned 36 tickets – would rack up costs of R288 000 and their spouse (allocated 18 tickets) another R144 000. Deputy ministers and their spouses are now also restricted to 12 tickets. “Clipping the wings of the ANC retirement Gravy Plane can save South African taxpayers up to R39 million per year, or R195 million over a five-year period,” said Schreiber. Read: SA welfare recipients surpass number of taxpayers A 2020 report by Sunday Times revealed that as much as R45.3 million was spent on travel for former ministers, deputies, premiers and their spouses between 2014 and 2020. This included apartheid-era ministers and those who left the executive on grounds of being accused of corrupt activities. “This is a historic victory, as it signals the first time in our democratic history that the ANC has been forced to make meaningful cuts to the lavish lifestyles of former cabinet cadres,” Schreiber said. He noted that all beneficiaries of the post-retirement package who were previously eligible for free flights in terms of the Ministerial Handbook will remain eligible – but in terms of the new limits and only until March 31, 2027. Palesa Mofokeng is a Moneyweb intern.