Chinese high-yield dollar bonds declined for a second day, as a three-week rally loses steam amid a worsening Covid outbreak and fading optimism over policy support measures. The bonds dropped 0.5 cents to 2 cents on the dollar Tuesday morning, according to credit traders. Country Garden Holdings Ltd.’s 3.3% dollar note due 2031 fell 1.3 cents to 62.7 cents as of 9:29 am in Hong Kong, after posting the biggest decline in more than three weeks, according to Bloomberg-compiled prices. China Fortune Land Development made some repayment after creditors holding half of its outstanding onshore debt signed off on its restructuring proposal in the first quarter, the developer said in a Monday statement. A Bloomberg gauge of developer stocks slipped as much as 2.1%, poised to extend Monday’s 4.4% tumble on concerns over the impact of Covid lockdowns in Shanghai.  China Fortune Land Development made some repayment after creditors holding half of its outstanding onshore debt signed off on its restructuring proposal in the first quarter, the developer said in a Monday statement. While the statement didn’t specify how much holders were paid, at least five local holders of the firm’s onshore bonds have each received 1.3% of principal repayment after endorsing the debt revamp proposed by the developer, according to the investors who requested anonymity discussing private matters. A recent rebound in Chinese property bonds won’t last, and investors are adopting more hedging while diversifying through indexes, according to an executive at one of China’s top brokerages. “Because developers remain beset by a negative sales outlook and prolonged pandemic, the recent rebound in their bonds will be temporary,” said Yang Chen, executive director at the fixed income, currency and commodities department of CITIC Securities Co. Investors seeking steady returns should instead pay attention to bonds issued by local government financing vehicles, banks’ perpetual debt and index-linked products, she added. China’s property developers need to transform their growth model as their market potential declines, supply of low-cost housing increases and regulation on their financial health tightens, the Securities Daily said in a commentary. A consensus among China’s top 10 developers, as reflected by what’s been said at their earnings briefings, is market size will shrink to 10 trillion yuan in the next 5-10 years, according to the newspaper, which is backed by the official People’s Daily. Chinese high-yield dollar bonds dropped 0.5 to 2 cents on the dollar Tuesday morning, according to credit traders. Country Garden’s 3.3% dollar bond due 2031 dropped 1.3 cents to 62.7 cents as of 9:29 a.m. in Hong Kong, after posting the biggest decline in more than three weeks, according to Bloomberg-compiled prices. CIFI’s 4.45% note due 2026 and Sunac’s 6.65% note due 2024 also declined. A Shimao Group Holdings unit has proposed a one-year extension for a domestic private bond puttable this month, REDD reported, citing two sources briefed by bondholders. Shanghai Shimao Co. has proposed to pay 10% upfront cash for its 500 million yuan, 3.7% bond due 2023 and puttable on April 26, while extending the remaining principal by one year, according to REDD. Chinese 3-year AA-rated onshore corporate bond spreads tightened to the narrowest since Nov. 2020. A key offshore unit of Zhenro Properties Group Ltd. will ask investors to vote on a proposal to extend repayment of a 627 million yuan ($98.4 million) ABS tranche at a two-day virtual meeting starting Tuesday. The proposed additional sale of HK$588 million of convertible bonds due 2025 will be consolidated and form a single series with its HK$1.96 billion 6.95% convertible debt, developer CIFI Holdings said in an exchange filing.