Stocks rose Monday amid a rally in Hong Kong spurred by China’s move to ease a dispute with the US over audits. Treasuries fell on the prospect of sharp Federal Reserve interest-rate hikes to fight inflation. Chinese tech shares in Hong Kong climbed over 4% after Beijing sought to modify a rule that restricts offshore-listed firms from sharing sensitive financial data with foreign regulators. That may allow the US to gain full access to audits, reducing the risk of Chinese firms losing Wall Street listings. US and European futures edged up as traders monitored Russia’s war in Ukraine. The two sides may resume video talks Monday. Some European governments are pushing for stiffer sanctions on Russia amid reports that its troops executed unarmed civilians in Ukrainian towns. Oil steadied at about $100 a barrel as traders weighed threats to demand from China’s Covid outbreak and moves to tap strategic reserves to enhance supply and curb elevated energy costs. The Treasury yield curve is flashing more warnings that economic growth will slow as the Fed raises rates to tame inflation stoked in part by commodities. The two-year US yield has exceeded the 30-year for the first time since 2007, joining inversions on other parts of the curve.  The Fed minutes later this week will shape views on the odds of a half percentage-point rate increase in May and provide key details on how the central bank will shrink its balance sheet. “It would not be surprising to see yields rise further from here and it is very hard to know where they will land,” Angela Ashton, founder and director of investment consulting firm Evergreen Consultants, wrote in a note. “Markets are volatile and there is every chance they will overshoot.” New York Fed President John Williams said Saturday a “sequence of steps” can get rates back to more normal levels. Mary Daly, president of the San Francisco Fed, said in an interview published Sunday that rising inflation and a tight labor market strengthen the case for a half-point May hike. A strong jobs report Friday bolstered the case for the Fed to push up borrowing costs. The US added 431 000 jobs in March while the unemployment rate fell to 3.6%, near its pre-pandemic low. In China, where markets are closed for a holiday, most of Shanghai’s 25 million residents are under some form of Covid lockdown. State media also reported a new subtype of the omicron variant. Key events to watch this week: Some of the main moves in markets: