Treasuries fell with European stocks and US equity futures on Monday amid heightened worries about inflation risks and tightening financial conditions. A gauge of the dollar rose. The 10-year Treasury yield touched 2.77%, exceeding the equivalent rate on Chinese debt for the first time since 2010. Real US yields are getting closer to turning positive, a development that could be an impediment for risk assets. Europe’s Stoxx 600 fell and the euro pared an earlier gain to trade little changed after polls showed French President Emmanuel Macron in a tight race with his nationalist rival Marine Le Pen in the final round of the French election. Investors have been fretting whether a Le Pen presidency would make France less business friendly and more euroskeptic. US futures declined, pointing to more challenges for global shares after the Federal Reserve last week signaled sharp interest-rate hikes and balance-sheet reduction to curb price pressures. Chinese stocks also fell, weighed down by the mainland’s Covid outbreak, elevated factory-gate prices and regulatory concerns in the technology sector. Oil retreated on risks to demand from China’s Covid lockdowns, including extensive curbs in Shanghai.  Market sentiment continues to be shaped by a hawkish Fed, commodity-market disruptions caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the prospect of an economic slowdown. China’s Covid curbs threaten to exacerbate supply-chain snarls, further stoking inflation risks. The nation’s factory gate prices increased more than expected in March. “Today, the mantra for many investors is ‘Don’t fight the Fed when it is fighting inflation,’” Ed Yardeni, president of Yardeni Research, wrote in a note. “We agree with that, but it’s not as bearish as it sounds” in part because accumulated excess liquidity and an inflation boost to earnings are props for stocks, he added. Cleveland Fed President Loretta Mester said she’s confident that the US will avoid a recession as the Fed tightens policy, though the inflation rate will probably remain at more than 2% into next year. The yen weakened to its lowest against the dollar since 2015 as rising Treasury yields boost the greenback’s allure. Meanwhile, Russia appointed a new commander for its operations in Ukraine. Moscow is refocusing its war effort in the east, having failed to secure territory around the capital, Kyiv. Russia said it will halt bond auctions for the remainder of 2022 due to prohibitive borrowing costs. The country’s first external default in a century now looks all but inevitable after it was sanctioned and isolated over the conflict. Events to watch this week: Some of the main moves in markets: