 FIFI PETERS: Let’s discuss what is happening regarding food prices. Food prices, as you would know if you have been shopping for food lately, have been on the up. The price of the shopping basket keeps on getting higher, and the prices of a number of essential foods like cooking oil and tomatoes seem to be worrying the Competition Commission. This [is] detailed in its latest a report on price monitoring. The commission is worried about food inflation because of the effect that it has on poorer households. It has issued a stern warning in its latest Essential Food-Price Monitoring report that companies [should] not try to exploit the current situation with unjustified price increases. We’ve got James Hodge, the chief economist at the Competition Commission for more on the story. James, thanks very much for your time. What is going on in the essential food baskets, just based on your data – and what is driving prices higher? JAMES HODGE: Thanks, Fifi. I think what we are seeing is that global volatility is feeding into the domestic market. Our analysis of the food prices is just to understand whether there is a rationale behind some of the increases, or [whether] we should be concerned about others. I think what is interesting is that in the past high trade in food was meant to reduce volatility because your volatility was a local drought or something that affected the domestic market. Then you could import and resolve that. What we’ve seen in the two years since the pandemic started is that global volatility is much higher than local volatility. The recent outbreak of war in the Ukraine has exactly highlighted that once more, as a big producer of cooking oil, of wheat – suddenly those products are seeing big price increases in global markets. So what we’ve done is to look at how much of the essential food basket is affected by trade and how much is not. What is interesting in that is most of your vegetables, your milk and most of your proteins, in fact, or poultry, are all actually local markets. There isn’t much trade that happens globally with them, so the prices in those should be affected [only] by local conditions and shouldn’t be going up by much. In contrast wheat, feeding into bread prices, as well as cooking oil and even maize, are highly traded. So maize is different, it’s exported, but it’s open to market forces globally. So I think there’s good news for South African consumers on one hand that, with the outbreak of war a lot of our products shouldn’t be affected. On the other hand some will be affected. There one just wants to ensure that the increases are not exploited. So the expectation that we might see some increases is not used as a pretext to putting in some bigger increases or not reducing the price when it swings the other way. That’s what we’ve seen in the past – that often it’s quick to go up and slow to go down. FIFI PETERS: How would the commission measure unjustified price increases? I was looking at what avocado prices were doing the other day, and apparently they’ve hit a 24-year high. So [for] a retailer that tries to keep up with perhaps the cost pressures that that [it] is presented with, what is a justified or an unjustified increase by the commission’s definition? JAMES HODGE: Yes, that’s why we want to track these markets. They are almost wholesale markets. Avocados are notoriously seasonal and [we’re] already starting to see a drop in prices as they come more into season. So we can look at that history and say, well, look, that’s a local market and it’s seasonally driven, and maybe we shouldn’t be too concerned. But if, for instance, we see the global wheat prices go up by 10% but bread is going up by 20%, we need to ask ourselves why that is happening. That’s why we track almost the wholesale market and also the retail market. What we have seen, which is why we do have somewhat of a concern, is that since the pandemic started there’s been a lot more volatility in food pricing, which is understandable. We face so many shocks, hard lockdowns, supply-chain problems in the rest of the world, global climate events, and now war. But with that volatility you’ve seen there, this sort of price margin between the farm gate and the retail price going up sustainably and not coming back down again, it does concern us that again their retailers are quick to up the price when costs go up; but they are slow to bring it down when their costs are reduced. The local market seems [to go] the other way. FIFI PETERS: Have you received any reports just on possible exploitation that may be taking place in this higher-pricing environment? I’m also interested in potential penalties that could be forthcoming for companies that are unjustly increasing prices. JAMES HODGE: We haven’t as yet. We receive reports on an ongoing basis, but if we see that it’s a result of market forces that don’t suggest exploitation, we don’t necessarily take action. What we do find, and we’ve found since the beginning of the pandemic, is that it’s good to have a dialogue with the ……6:44 [food] producers. So we have in the past indicated, look, we can see that the rand is appreciating, wheat prices are going up, but let’s talk about how that is passed [on] in a fair way without exploiting it – and having those discussions with expectations on both sides, and hopefully avoiding the need for action. We find that advocacy is often better than trying to just wield a stick; and to have that openness and discussion with the industry. FIFI PETERS: All right, James, we will leave it there for now. Good to see that the commission is monitoring the trends in food prices, and hopefully companies won’t take too much of an advantage of the environment. That’s James Hodge, the chief economist at the Competition Commission.