In an update on Wednesday afternoon, Eskom said loadshedding would proceed from Stage 4 to Stage 3 as of 22:00 on Wednesday night, continuing at that level until Friday. This follows six generation units being returned to service over the past 24 hours, and three more units set to return on Thursday. According to the state-owned enterprise, 5 787MW is on planned maintenance, and another 14 259MW of capacity “is unavailable due to unplanned breakdowns.” Earlier in the day Eskom CEO André de Ruyter had said: “We are expecting a number of large units to return during the course of tomorrow and if those units stay online and if they perform as expected, then we should be able to consider lifting load shedding entirely by the start of the weekend.” As of Wednesday morning, Eskom had lost a unit at Majuba power station due to a boiler tube leak, as well as another unit at Arnot power station which tripped. The utility saw a return to service of two units at Lethabo power station while Camden also saw a unit return, as did Matla power station. “The units are coming back, we are again putting in every effort that we can, to reduce load shedding as soon as we can.” “Again, we wish to issue an apology to the country for the load shedding that we unavoidably have to impose in order to prevent the much greater inconvenience and risk of a total system blackout,” De Ruyter says. Read: Load shedding crisis as Eskom breakdowns hit record levels Total blackout not a risk Eskom says despite the latest intensification of power cuts in the country, a total system blackout remains off the cards. According to De Ruyter, Eskom’s assessment is that its systems still have enough headroom to avoid a total blackout. Earlier Eskom’s chief executive for transmission Segomoco Scheepers had said: “As we speak with Stage 4, we are reasonably comfortable that the system is in balance, the recovery plans have been spoken about in terms of the units that are coming back online.” “Therefore, we are not particularly concerned about this risk, but it’s something that is always top of mind for the system operator to make sure that every second they are doing what is necessary to maintain balance in the system.” Listen: Eskom pushes load shedding to stage 4