China’s offshore high-yield credit market is at a critical juncture as key metrics showed stress reaching record levels in March, with a recent rebound showing signs of fatigue. Sunac China Holdings Ltd.’s dollar notes were on pace for fifth day of declines Wednesday, poised for their lowest levels in two weeks, in a continued fallout from missing its first payment on such debt. But Chinese high-yield bonds rose at least 0.5 cent on the dollar, according to credit traders. Elsewhere, 14 Chinese cities have loosened grips on home purchases in April, including some in the Yangtze River Delta that are popular among buyers. That helped push a Bloomberg gauge of developers 0.6% higher, ending a two-day slide. The developer’s 6.65% bond due 2024 fell 3.4 cents on the dollar to 22.1 cents as of 4:17pm in Hong Kong, according to Bloomberg-compiled prices. Its 7.95% dollar note due 2023, on which an interest payment wasn’t made by Monday’s initial deadline, dropped 2.3 cents to 23.7 cents after a 5.2-cent slide Tuesday. Shares of some Chinese real estate firms rose after the Securities Times reported that 14 cities have loosened restrictions on home purchases in April, suggesting more regions may follow suit. China South City Holdings Ltd. jumped as much as 9.2%, Poly Developments and Holdings Group Co. rose 7.5% and Seazen Holdings Co. gained 3.6%. China’s vow last month to stabilize financial markets and support the property sector “may be too late” for indebted developers with near-term maturities, said Freddy Wong, head of Asia Pacific fixed income at Invesco. The post-statement bounce for high-yield dollar bonds was more the result of an end to panic selling “rather than genuine relief for the sector,” he told Bloomberg News in written comments. Wong added that concrete liquidity and financing support are needed before a sustainable rebound can be expected. Moody’s lowered its outlook on CIFI Holdings Group Co. to negative from stable. “The negative outlook reflects our expectation that CIFI’s property sales will decline over the next 12-18 months amid difficult operating conditions, which will weaken the company’s operating cash flow and credit metrics,” said analyst Cedric Lai. Chinese high-yield dollar bonds were flat to 1 cent higher on the dollar Wednesday morning, as hopes grow over easing of Covid lockdowns in the country, according to credit traders. Powerlong Real Estate Holdings Ltd.’s 4.9% dollar bond due 2026 increased 1.2 cents to 38.2 cents as of 12:32pm in Hong Kong, Bloomberg-compiled prices show, on track for its first gain in five days. Redsun Properties Group Ltd.’s 9.5% dollar bond due 2023 climbed 1 cent to 29.7 cents, after dropping 1 cent Tuesday. While more Chinese cities are easing property curbs, it will take a nationwide relaxation to see a sustainable recovery in developer bonds, says Ting Meng, senior Asia credit strategist at ANZ Bank. Shanghai’s prolonged lockdown is putting developers’ financial strength under great pressure, hurting sentiment in credit market, Meng said in phone interview with Bloomberg News. He added the recent rally in Chinese high-yield dollar bonds, “built on policy expectations,” may fade because city-level policy easing is “far from enough” to improve developers’ financial health. Losses are among the worst ever. Borrowing costs are at a record high and big investors are cutting positions. Market concerns prompted vows for policy action in the middle of last month that helped spark a rally, but that rebound has been fading in recent days amid scant signs of policy details and as Covid lockdowns weigh on sentiment. Already contending with a clampdown that triggered record defaults and dwindling home sales, developers need to shore up investor confidence in the embattled sector to sustain their recent rebound. Uncertainty persists about the scale of many property firms’ debt, with a number of them yet to release audited results for last year. Two districts in Nanjing removed limits against people from other cities buying homes there on Tuesday, while four cities in Hubei province said to have lowered mortgage rates by as much as 56 basis points, the Securities Times reports. They joined 12 cities including Qinghuangdao, Dalian, Lanzhou, Suzhou and Quzhou that eased housing purchase rules earlier this month. The loosening by Suzhou and Nanjing in the Yangtze River Delta, which has long been the barometer of China’s housing market, indicates that more Tier 2 cities may do the same, said Ding Zuyu, co-president of real-estate services firm E-House (China) Enterprise Holdings Ltd., according to the report.