As the world heads into almost two years of living through the Covid-19 pandemic, significant shifts have taken place in terms of what people are insuring, as well as discovering new risks that they previously were not exposed to, or certainly not as aware of as they are now. Aspects such as increased digitisation and cyber risks and identity fraud have come up strongly, driving behaviour has changed completely and people are driving their vehicles for much longer and delaying new car purchases. Pet adoptions have soared as more people work from home and spend more time with their pets. Healthcare has also received focused attention – both in terms of cost of care and having access to quality healthcare in a crisis. Given the changing nature of our behaviour and personal risk, the demand for niche insurance solutions has consistently grown month-on-month as consumers seek certainty of protection against very specific exposures. [We have] seen this trend across various lines of business, notably in areas such as gap cover, mechanical warranty and service and maintenance motor covers, cybercrime and medical emergency services. While cost-containment has been a big drive for many consumers, there is also a greater appreciation of the need for risk protection and avoiding any hard financial knocks of an uninsured peril occurring, especially when finances are already strained. The growing complexity and inter-related nature of risks is also seeing a return to professional broker advice and guidance. As consumers find themselves in increasingly volatile times, and uncertain of how to balance costs versus potential risks, many consumers wanted to avoid the pitfalls inherent with a D-I-Y approach to their risk. The old adage of ‘you don’t know what you don’t know’ rang true for many people who sought out professional advice – notably on the healthcare funding front. Here are some of the key trends and shifts in personal risk GENRIC has noted over the last year, and what this means for insurance and risk planning in 2022. Consumers have been rattled by the ongoing pandemic uncertainty, and there is now a greater appreciation of just how unpredictable and far-reaching risk can be. As a result, consumers are wanting the absolute certainty that they are covered for specific risks – whether that be a car breakdown, an unexpected hospitalisation or a sick pet. As personal circumstances continue to change and evolve, the guidance and advice of a professional broker will prove invaluable in structuring an insurance and risk management strategy that’s fit for purpose. Carl Moodley is chief underwriting & claims officer at GENRIC Insurance Company Limited.