Part 1, Volume 3, Chapter 3 of the Zondo State Capture Report deals with the South African Revenue Service (Sars). The Zondo Commission found that Bain colluded with former president Jacob Zuma and designed “a planned and co-ordinated agenda to seize and restructure Sars”, well in advance of Tom Moyane being catapulted in as Commissioner of Sars. The findings of the Nugent Commission and the Zondo Commission The Nugent Commission was formed to examine irregularities at Sars, whereas the Zondo Commission was formed to investigate state capture in public entities. Nevertheless, the Nugent Commission findings are dovetailed by Zondo Commission’s evidence: Read:
Nugent loosens the final shackles
Saica will investigate all members implicated in state capture The Zondo Commission further found that: Read:
Bain’s role in dismantling Sars
The reign of Bain is on the wane
The looting of Eskom, Transnet and SAA by the Gupta media enterprise Witnesses who gave evidence related to Sars at the Zondo Commission included: Athol Williams – a former employee/independent consultant at Bain. He oversaw an investigation commissioned by Bain regarding its contract with Sars. He resigned due to Bain’s non-transparency with him, and the authorities. According to Williams, Bain’s strategy comprised targeting an organisation, exerting control, and pursuing “financial enrichment through corrupt procurement and other means”. The commission expressed its appreciation to Williams for the evidence presented concerning Bain, Moyane and Zuma in regard to the plans for the capture of Sars. Williams rejected attempts by Bain to buy his silence. Vlok Symington – a senior employee of Sars and the victim in a hostage incident at the tax agency, which was described by the commission as an “extreme example of the culture of fear and bullying that characterised [Mr] Moyane’s tenure”. Symington told the commission that “Minister [Pravin] Gordhan was allegedly seen as an obstacle to parties involved in state capture”. Read: Cracking down on the professionals who enable financial crimes Johann van Loggerenberg – a former Sars employee told the commission that there were dedicated units within Sars which were mandated to assist law enforcement agencies to control organised crime, from a revenue and customs and excise perspective. Tom Moyane – the former Sars Commissioner who gave evidence at the commission under subpoena. The commission had received evidence that Moyane had been presented with a ‘First 100 Days Plan’ months before he joined Sars. The plan proposed to “identify individuals to neutralise”. Moyane said that the use of the word “neutralise” was unfortunate. Symington told the commission that Bain’s plan for Sars had been “presented to the executives of Sars as a fait accompli”. Moyane disagreed and told the commission that he ran a “consultative organisation in which everything was put before a team for discussion and approval”. He said that he never took a “dictatorial position”. Minister Pravin Gordhan – who told the commission that when the Ministry of Finance advertised in 2013 for a commissioner, more than 120 applications were received. The commission noted that Gordhan “observed first hand that [Mr] Moyane refused to answer to him as the responsible Minister, instead running Sars as he wished, would not reveal and discuss what changes he was making at Sars, refused to discuss his new operational model, and carved out some of the institutions most senior people as well as Sars’ compliance capacity”. The commission held that Gordhan’s testimony “is important evidence of the capture of the institution”. Read: Moyane’s Sars review was Gupta-linked – Gordhan Moyane’s purging splurge The commission observed that: Read:
Sars ‘rogue unit’ narrative consigned to trash heap
‘Rogue unit’ propaganda slur finally put to bed Zondo Commission Recommendations The commission has recommended that: