Cryptos are down nearly 50% since their peak in November 2021. However, cryptocurrencies have been through far worse in the past. Writing off cryptos has become something of a fool’s errand, since they are always capable of springing a surprise rebound. So where are cryptos headed in 2022? Join Moneyweb’s Ciaran Ryan for this special Moneyweb Live Session, where he will be joined by a panel of experts – namely, Sean Sanders of Revix, Marius Reitz of Luno and Gianluca Sacco of VALR – to discuss their outlook. This Moneyweb Live Session will be livestreamed on Thursday, February 3 2022 at 11:00. Click on the link below to livestream the session, or watch via the Moneyweb Facebook and LinkedIn pages: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tNLjqHp442I  Panellists:  Marius Reitz, general manager for Africa at Luno Reitz is GM for Africa at Luno, a leading global cryptocurrency company with its head office in London. He joined Luno in 2016 and helped the company grow to a diverse team of 450 people across three continents. Reitz wholeheartedly shares his company’s philosophy of upgrading the world to a better financial system. He believes in finding solutions to safe and easy cryptocurrency purchases and transactions around the world. Reitz is a chartered management accountant and holds an honours degree in management accounting from the University of Stellenbosch.   Sean Sanders, founder and CEO of Revix Sean is a CFA Charterholder and an expert in technology-focused investment management. He worked at Knife Capital, a growth equity focused venture capital firm, and as a portfolio manager and financial analyst for a specialty finance investment group. He was awarded summa cum laude for his honours research into the global ETF industry and offers a radical dynamism to bring about a new investment paradigm with Revix.   Gianluca Sacco, chief operating officer at VALR  About Moneyweb Live Sessions: Moneyweb Live Sessions are a series of livestreamed engaging conversations hosted by Moneyweb, on various topics related to the markets, business, personal finance, property, cryptocurrency and more. The sessions are livestreamed from Moneyweb.co.za, and the Moneyweb Facebook and LinkedIn pages.