US equity futures climbed and Asian stocks were mixed Wednesday as traders awaited a Federal Reserve decision that could buffet markets by shaping expectations for monetary-policy tightening. Japanese shares slid, while China’s CSI 300 index gained but remained on the cusp of a technical bear market with state media calling on investors to hold their nerves amid this year’s global selloff. US contracts initially sank in Asia before turning higher. European futures were in the green. Wall Street delivered another volatile session Tuesday. The S&P 500 erased a near-3% intraday slide but then fell again to the lowest since October, led by a drop in technology stocks. Microsoft Corp. rebounded in extended trading on reassuring forecasts after releasing earnings. The benchmark US 10-year Treasury yield was little changed ahead of the Fed, while a dollar gauge fluctuated. Crude held most of its recent rally, in part on the risk that any Russia-Ukraine conflict could disrupt supplies.  Traders are waiting to see how hawkish the Fed sounds in the fight against high inflation — both over interest-rate hikes expected from March and subsequent reductions in its holdings of Treasuries. Ebbing stimulus as the economic rebound from the pandemic notches down a gear could be a recipe for more market swings. Global stocks have already shed some 7% in 2022. While the Fed could spur more selling if it comes off as hawkish, Chair Jerome Powell will likely say policy is data-dependent and supply chains are improving, while indicating that inflation could be peaking, Frances Stacy, portfolio strategist at Optimal Capital, said on Bloomberg Television. “I think what that’s going to do is potentially reassure markets that the Fed put is ready, willing and able,” she said. “That could cause some serious enthusiasm and a short squeeze.” Goldman Sachs Group Inc. strategists warned that the risk of a “growth shock” to equities is increasing. The International Monetary Fund cut its global economic expansion forecast for 2022, citing weaker prospects for the U.S. and China along with persistent inflation. In the cryptocurrency sector, Bitcoin extended its gains for the week, trading at near $38 000. Here are some more views about the Fed: Some of the main moves in markets: