MyMTN Sky is a ground-breaking offering from MTN that aims to upend the cellular market in SA. Anyone spending R799 or more a month can now get flight vouchers, discounts on accommodation and a host of lifestyle benefits when they make calls or use data. “This is the next evolution to our previous plans and we believe this is where the market is headed,” says Jay Chetty, MTN SA’s general manager of the postpaid market segment within the Consumer Business Unit. “MyMTN Sky is MTN’s [range of] premium price plans designed for customers who spend a lot of time on their phones and are looking for innovative solutions coupled with premium benefits to complement their lifestyle.” MyMTN Sky is structured according to the consumer’s monthly spend, as shown in the table below, ranging from R799 a month for the Bronze package to R1 999 a month for Platinum customers. The Silver, Gold and Platinum packages allow for unlimited MTN to MTN calls, while the entry level Bronze package allows 1 600 minutes of call time a month, rising to 10 000 minutes a month for Platinum users. Another key benefit of the MyMTN Sky packages is the allocation of two free SIM cards per account. Additional free data and international roaming are also included. “We went to market in October 2021 with this new and improved premium MyMTN Sky price plan that goes above and beyond what customers have come to expect from their mobile service providers, and which also offers maximum value on contracts matched with handset deals,” adds Chetty. A revolutionary aspect of the new packages is the offer of lifestyle benefits such as flight vouchers, discounts on accommodation, dining and a myriad of other benefits. “We have signed up a number of partners and more will be added in time. The objective is to build our MTN loyalty and value programme and give customers more compelling reasons to stay within the MTN family. The MyMTN Sky plans are designed to offer our customers a worry-free connected life,” says Chetty. “The response to the programme since its launch has been huge, and it will only get better.” The refreshed MyMTN Sky packages now include: * Subject to fair use policies (FUPs)  Unlimited calls (MTN to MTN)  Unlimited calls (MTN to MTN)  Unlimited calls (MTN to MTN) Anyone who consistently spends more that R700 per month on airtime and data should experience MyMTN Sky. It is available to customers who take out a new contract, or add and/or upgrade their contract or price plan. These plans offer customers unlimited MTN-to-MTN calling (on selected price plans), all-net minutes, anytime premium data, international calling, Hello World roaming bundles and 400 SMSs per day, along with lifestyle benefits and value-added experiences. What are the exclusive lifestyle benefits included for MyMTN Sky customers? Family benefits Some of the key benefits for customers and their families include: Two additional free SIM cards: Keep the whole family connected on MyMTN Sky with two additional free SIM cards on MyMTN Sky Bronze, Silver and Gold provisioned for data share, and two additional free SIM cards each provisioned with 25GB promotional data on MyMTN Sky Platinum. Data sharing: Share data with up to 20 beneficiaries (excluding MyMTN Sky Platinum). Outdoor experience vouchers: Swap the city lights for breathtaking bushveld nights and take advantage of an exclusive partnership that unlocks South Africa. International calling, travel, dining benefits and priority help desk Apart from access to a dedicated priority help desk and a personal concierge, the packages include international calling and Hello World roaming bundles, introducing a world without borders. The packages now come with local flight vouchers to make travel more accessible and cheaper, as well as accommodation vouchers that are accepted at any signature Premier group hotel or resort across South Africa. Discounts for dining out are also available, as well as cleaning service vouchers from SweepSouth, SA’s leading home-cleaning service. Where can customers sign up or upgrade for these premium plans? Brought to you by MTN. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.