Chinese real estate developers extended declines on signs that debt stress is growing in the embattled sector, with Country Garden Holdings Co. reportedly unable to find demand for a $300 million convertible bond. Several of China’s largest banks have become more selective about funding real estate projects by local government financing vehicles, concerned that some are taking on too much risk after they replaced private developers as key buyers of land, people familiar with the matter said. A gauge of Chinese builders fell 4.5%, set for the most since September, while Country Garden’s shares slid 7.8%. Sunac China Holdings Ltd.’s shares tumbled by a record 23% after a $580 million top-up share sale did little to restore confidence in the firm’s longer-term financial health. Some of China’s most stressed builders face a raft of key payments this week in a test for the country’s volatile credit market.  Key Developments: Chinese developer Country Garden Holdings failed to find enough demand for a potential $300m convertible bond, according to a report by IFR. Morgan Stanley and JP Morgan gauged investor interest but the deal did not go ahead, IFR reported, citing people with knowledge of the matter. Country Garden didn’t immediately respond to a Bloomberg request for comment. The company’s dollar bond due 2024 fell 4 cents on the dollar to 88.2 cents as of 4:23 p.m. in Hong Kong, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Several of China’s largest banks have become more selective about funding real estate projects by local government financing vehicles, concerned that some are taking on too much risk after they replaced private developers as key buyers of land, people familiar with the matter said. At least five state-run banks have imposed new restrictions this year on loans to weaker LGFVs and state-owned firms seeking to buy land and develop new real estate projects, said the people, asking not to be identified discussing a private matter. Banks are being more stringent in assessing the financial strength of the local economy and the sales prospects of the projects, said the people. Evergrande completed the first batch of Hengchi 5 eletric car production 12 days earlier than planned, according to a statement on its website. The mass production of Hengchi electric cars is now “in countdown”, it said. Sunac China told Bloomberg it doesn’t plan further equity-market financings in the near term, after selling $580 million in new shares and seeing the stock fall a record 20%. There’s no near-term plan to sell more equity in itself or pare some of its stake in unit Sunac Services, the company said. Chinese developer Shimao and onshore unit Shanghai Shimao Jianshe will meet with investors Monday to seek approval to extend two ABS repayment deadlines, according to private filings with the Shanghai Stock Exchange seen by Bloomberg News. Sunac China Holdings Ltd.’s bonds and shares fell after the embattled real estate giant raised $580 million in a top-up stock sale to fend off a liquidity crisis. The nation’s third-largest property developer by sales sold 452 million shares at HK$10 apiece, a 15% discount to Wednesday’s close in Hong Kong, according to terms of the deal obtained by Bloomberg News. The share placement has done little to restore investor confidence in the firm’s longer-term financial health, even though funds will be used in part to repay some loans. A top-performing Chinese fund manager is buying dollar bonds of the country’s developers after offloading them last year, betting that authorities will soon unleash further measures to support the sector. Developer bonds yielding 10% to 20% offer value because investors turned overly pessimistic, according to Deng Sicong, a Beijing-based fund manager at China Asset Management Co. Deng’s fund is the top performer of the past year among the 25 Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor products that give China’s domestic investors access to offshore securities, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.  Other distressed developers may follow the same tactic as Guangzhou R&F Properties Co. to extend or freely haircut a portion of their debt, whether in good or bad faith, Bloomberg Intelligence analyst Andrew Chan wrote in a note. This action should diminish investor expectations of distressed bonds being redeemed at par, but at the same time high-yield bondholders may welcome a haircut rather than endure restructuring. Yuzhou Group said it is seeking an exchange of two of its 2022 senior notes as it attempts to avoid default. The company said in a filing it’s inviting holders of its 6% and 8.625% 2022 senior notes, totaling $542 million, to exchange them for new bonds with an extended maturity. Yuzhou said it doesn’t expect to have sufficient funds to repay note holders who don’t agree to the exchange, “which would likely trigger an event of default.” DaFa Properties Group extended the expiration deadline for an exchange offer and consent solicitation of 9.95% 2022 notes by 24 hours to 4 p.m. London time January 13, according to a statement to the Hong Kong stock exchange.