JSE-listed mobile operator MTN group wants to hire 150 digital experts in 2022 to help the company keep up with growing digital demand, it said on Monday. The company, which has ambitions to become a fully-fledged technology services company, says it is now looking to fill positions in new critical roles such as UX (user experience) and UI (user interface) design, product owners, performance marketers, digital content specialists, e-commerce experts, “full stack” developers, “scrum masters” and business analysts. “We intend to lead the delivery of a bold new digital world and are therefore looking to expand our teams to ensure we keep challenging what we do to always do better,” MTN South Africa’s chief of human resources Tebogo Maenetja says in a statement. Africa’s largest mobile operator says this employment spree will help the group reach its ambitions to become the continent’s leading digital platform business by 2025. “Our experts and expertise will be central to helping us bring these benefits of the modern, digital world to more South African citizens, but we know our success will be measured by the quality of our people and our ability to create and to influence and improve the lives of all,” Maenetja adds. Read: Nigeria’s full-year outperformance sends MTN shares soaring Covid-19-induced jobs bloodbath As a result of the coronavirus pandemic, South Africa has seen unrelenting job losses. The country’s unemployment rate for the third quarter of 2021 reached record highs of 34.9%, the highest it has been since 2008. MTN says its latest expansion plans are also aimed at helping the country recover from the jobs devastation experienced. “As we recover from the devastation of Covid-19, exciting job openings for young people and those with high-level digital skills and aptitude are opening up within MTN; proof of the power that connectivity holds for South Africans,” she says. According to the United Nations, during the Covid-19 pandemic South Africa has seen a surge in some IR technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) in medical diagnosis,  the Internet of Things (IoT) for consumer goods, and mobile applications for financial transactions, transportation and utility vending. MTN says that with this expansion, it is embracing these new developments in digital technology and service areas such as fintech, AI, IoT and robotics. “There is much to do as we continue expanding our solutions, put more focus on innovation, and keep investing in the quality of our network, which has led to MTN again being again voted SA’s best network. We look forward to welcoming over 100 high-level candidates to MTN SA in 2022 as they join us on the next exciting chapter in our journey,” Maenetja says. Listen/Read: Implications of the updated critical skill list for the job market