Andre Piehl (52), operations executive within the leading brands portfolio of JSE-listed Famous Brands, died on Saturday morning (January 29) after being hit by a car while on his way back from a cycling training session. The group – which owns fast food brands Steers, Fishaways and Debonairs – confirmed the news of his passing in a company newsletter. “It is with great sadness and disbelief, that I must share the tragic news of the untimely passing of our colleague and friend, Andre Piehl,” said Derrian Nadauld, chief operations officer of leading brands at Famous Brands. “Andre was returning from a training ride near his home this morning [Saturday] when he was struck by a motor vehicle and succumbed to his injuries.” Arrest The South African Police Service (Saps) confirmed to Moneyweb on Monday that a 30-year-old male was arrested at the weekend. A culpable homicide case was opened at the Diepsloot Police Station after the suspect allegedly hit two cyclists. According to the Johannesburg Metro Police Department the second cyclist was airlifted to hospital and is in a critical condition. The suspect, who was driving a white Porsche Cayenne SUV, is alleged to have been driving under the influence of alcohol when he hit the two cyclists. The suspect was due to appear at the Randburg Magistrate’s Court on Monday. However, the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) told Moneyweb that the matter was not placed on the court roll. The NPA said it will provide a report on Tuesday as to why the suspect did not appear in court as planned. City condemns drunken driving City of Johannesburg Executive Mayor Mpho Phalatse on Monday called on law enforcement to investigate the case properly and ensure that justice is delivered. “I take this opportunity to condemn, in the strongest possible terms, the ongoing occurrence of drunken driving on South Africa’s roads,” he said. “Based on preliminary information from the scene, it would appear that the driver of the white Porsche SUV may have been under the influence of alcohol. “Further information indicates that the alleged driver may have also tried to flee from the scene of the deadly crash but could not do so because his vehicle was too damaged,” said Phalatse. The mayor said it is clear that campaigns and warnings against drunk driving bear little fruit. “It is disheartening that we continue to lose innocent lives as a result of the unlawful behaviour of drivers insisting on getting behind the wheel of a car when clearly under the influence of alcohol. “It is time for a zero-tolerance approach to be adopted. No more talk of points demerit systems and seeking to coerce careless drivers to act appropriately.” The mayor said the country and the city cannot afford the loss of life or the financial and economic devastation that comes with road crashes. Andre Piehl, hit by a driver who was allegedly under the influence of alcohol. Image: Supplied An ‘extraordinary contributor’ Piehl had been with Famous Brands for almost 15 years and held various managerial and executive roles across several of the group’s brands. According to Nadauld he received several accolades for his work and in 2020 was inducted as a Steers Master in recognition of his “extraordinary contribution”. Read: A 140% hike in profit leads Famous Brands’s half-year recovery As a cyclist and triathlete, Piehl represented South Africa at various sporting events around the world. Famous Brands says Piehl, who is survived by his wife and two children, will be remembered as a passionate man who loved his family. “Andre was a full-on guy who lived life to the max in everything he did, there were simply no half measures,” said Nadauld. “He was passionate about everything he undertook and cared deeply for people.” Nadauld lamented Piehl’s untimely departure from a world that he “embraced so wholeheartedly”. “You have left massive shoes to fill and an energy void that will be impossible to replace,” he said.