Moneyweb launches its Moneyweb Twitter Spaces – a series of live audio conversations on various topics related to investments, personal finance, property, cryptocurrency and more – on Friday, February 18. We will be kicking off the series with an insightful discussion about how to buy and invest in shares, sharing tools and providing awareness on how to navigate markets and make better investment decisions. Join MoneywebNOW presenter Simon Brown in conversation with leading certified financial planners Thulisile Nkomo from NFB Private Wealth Management, Gareth Collier from Crue Invest, and Elke Brink from PSG Wealth, on Friday, February 18, at 14:00. All the panelists are part of the Moneyweb Click An Advsior community. This Twitter Space is free to attend and listen in to, and can be joined via the Moneyweb Twitter page or click here.  Panelists:  Thulisile Nkomo, NFB Private Wealth Management Thulisile Nkomo (CFP®️) is a Private Wealth Manager and provides financial planning services to individual clients. After completing her BComm accounting degree at the University of Johannesburg, she started her career in the financial services industry in 2010 as a fund accountant. Her passion was always in financial planning and an opportunity was presented in 2013 when she was offered a position as an admin assistant to a Private Wealth Manager at NFB. While working for NFB she has obtained a ostgraduate Diploma in Financial Planning, followed by an Advanced Post Graduate Diploma in Financial Planning from the University of Free State.   Gareth Collier, Certified Financial Planner and Director at Crue Invest Gareth holds a BComm degree from the University of South Africa and is a Certified Financial Planning®️ professional. He is a director and shareholder at Crue Invest, and is driven to provide the highest level of advice and service to his clients. His expertise lies in investment planning, risk protection, business succession planning and employee benefits solutions.   Elke Brink, Wealth Advisor at PSG Wealth Elke is the youngest person in South Africa to have obtained the CFP qualification (in 2016) and has been working as a wealth advisor for the past five years.  Click here to join this Twitter Space conversation on Friday, February 18 at 14:00.