Crypto prices may be crashing but crypto arbitrage remains relatively unaffected. Arbitrage involves buying cryptos on one exchange and selling them on another for a higher price. In this special live session, we will separate fact from fiction on crypto arbitrage and discuss whether it has any place in an alternative investment strategy. Joining Moneyweb’s Ciaran Ryan will be Future Forex CEO Harry Scherzer, Dooya Kyle co-founder Dowie and Currency Hub co-founder Andrew Ludwig. This session is free to attend and will be livestreamed on Wednesday, 13 July at 11:00 on Moneyweb.co.za, the Moneyweb App, and the Moneyweb YouTube and LinkedIn pages. To add this Live Session to your calendar, click here. To receive updates on all Moneyweb events, sign up here. Moneyweb host  Ciaran Ryan
Moneyweb Crypto pod host Ciaran Ryan is a Johannesburg-based freelance writer who has a background in finance and mining, having previously headed up a gold mining operation in Ghana. He currently writes for several SA and overseas journals on matters ranging from mining to investment. Panellists  Harry Scherzer
CEO of Future Forex Scherzer is a qualified actuary with a strong financial and risk management background, who has capitalised on countless arbitrage opportunities over the years. A niche combination of technical ability from his actuarial background and strong interpersonal skills from his time as a business development director, have been the ideal engine for him to co-found Future Forex while driving its growth and steering the team’s focus in the right direction.   Kyle Dowie
Founder of Dooya After completing his Business Science degree in quantitative management, Dowie ventured into the world of investment banking, spending time in quantitative risk teams both locally and abroad. Upon his return to South Africa, he was introduced to crypto arbitrage and co-founded Dooya with a group of colleagues.   Andrew Ludwig
Co-founder of Currency Hub Andrew Ludwig is a founder of Currency Hub, one of SA’s longest-serving arbitrage strategies, established in 2017. It is the most regulated crypto provider in South Africa, serving as an authorised financial services provider with an FSCA asset management licence and is a Sarb-approved forex intermediary. These two licences are unique to Currency Hub, setting it apart from the rest of the industry, delivering pure arbitrage with zero losses.  To add this Live Session to your calendar, click here.  In case you missed Moneyweb’s Better Investor Conference, watch Ciaran Ryan and Future Forex CEO Harry Scherzer discuss how SA crypto arbitrage performs vs traditional investments, here.