The different living options for older people can be quite confusing. It’s important to go in with your eyes open. Here are answers to the questions we most frequently receive about retirement villages and homes. What is the difference between an old-age home and a retirement village? Old-age homes: The general understanding is that old-age homes offer the bare minimum with regard to facilities. The accommodation comes in various forms, but in most cases, seniors will share bathrooms, a dining room, visitors’ lounges and sometimes accommodation too. Medical facilities/services are normally provided; however, the standard can differ from home to home. Old-age homes are sometimes referred to as nursing homes as there is daily assistance for the elderly who need it. There is often an age limit at old-age homes (i.e. you have to be a certain age before you can buy in). Retirement villages: These are popular with retirees looking to retain their independence while living in a secure and safe environment. Usually, retirement villages offer stand-alone homes of different sizes and configurations, garages/carports, small gardens, community halls for entertainment purposes, and various common areas (parks, gardens). Most offer medical facilities and services, and some villages also offer frail care facilities. There may be an age restriction but it is less prohibitive. For example, “if you are 50+ years and older, you qualify to reside in Retire@Midstream”, says Melissa Petzer (sales property practitioner at Just Property Midstream Estate in the heart of Gauteng). What are the different ownership models for retirement villages? Life rights: The purchaser buys the right to live in a house/unit for the remainder of their life, in accordance with the housing development scheme for retired persons Act. The purchaser never owns the property, and the life right transaction is not processed through the Deeds Office. Ownership remains with the developer. Life rights cannot be transferred and can only expire on the death of the holder. Sectional title: This option is the same as any other sectional title transfer (purchaser owns the home) and is registered in the deeds office, attracting attorney transfer fees and transfer duty if the purchase is over one million. The purchaser or their heirs must pay a percentage of the resale value to the levy fund. Full title: As with sectional title, the purchaser owns the property. The freehold section would normally be run by a homeowners association and will be an easily sellable asset as it is freestanding. What are the pros and cons of life rights? Pros Cons The developer has more power than the residents in terms of deciding factors of the property as a whole. As a result, you may be disadvantaged by this imbalance of power. What is the difference between assisted living and frail care? Assisted living: This may suit a person who requires a little assistance but wishes to remain living in their home. Help will be supplied with daily living activities but not nursing. It is usually possible to hire a carer at your own cost should nursing be required. Frail Care: This would suit someone who needs skilled medical professionals who provide daily nursing as determined by either a medical practitioner or the family.  Most care facilities will assess the patient prior to admission to ensure that the frail care facility is able to provide the required care. What questions should I ask when trying to decide on a retirement living solution? Before you start shopping around, ask yourself some serious questions regarding your health and finances. Look ahead to what you are likely to need in terms of care (health, cooked meals, frail care etc). And don’t forget to do a thorough reckoning of your current and future financial status before making any decisions. Gavin O’Leary is property practitioner at Just Property Port Elizabeth and Lawrence Homan is a franchisee of Just Property.