State-run aviation management company Airports Company South Africa (Acsa) launched a new mobile airport application, simply dubbed the Acsa App, on 1 July to assist customers with easily accessible travel-related information. In a statement issued on Monday, Acsa said customers can view and search for flights by airport or make use of advanced searches to get future flight information including notifications on flight statuses. Read: Airline industry slowly recovering from lockdown According to Mthoko Mncwabe, Acsa’s chief information officer, travelers can also pre-book parking at OR Tambo International Airport (Ortia) and pay for parking tickets using the app. Mncwabe says the functionality also allows customers to save their parked vehicle locations to ensure that they do not get lost at airports. Acsa notes that the app’s features, including an airport guide and health and safety feature, will enable customers to search and navigate airport facilities and services. “It provides access to the clinic, current Covid-19 protocols in Acsa’s airports and its medical call-out procedures for all emergencies,” the company adds. The airport management firm says the app also lists Covid testing service providers and allows for travelers to book and store the results of PCR (polymerase chain reaction) tests when traveling through Ortia. Read: Acsa’s annus horribilis as FY loss hits R2.6bn Mncwabe says that customers can also provide direct feedback on the app and receive instant responses to their queries through artificial intelligence (AI)-driven chatbots on the platform or with Acsa’s customer service agents on the app’s intuitive chat interface. “The launch of this app is part of Acsa’s digital transformation drive that is central to enhancing the modern customer experience.” “With this innovative and convenient to use digital platform, our passengers can not only look forward to a smooth customer journey but also receive all the information they need to move through our airports with ease and efficiency,” he adds. The Acsa App is available for free download on Apple, Google and Huawei App stores. Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.