President Cyril Ramaphosa expects his newly-appointed Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment (BBBEE) Advisory Council to lead advocacy campaigns and counter negative narratives around transformation in the country. Speaking at the inaugural meeting of the advisory council on Tuesday, Ramaphosa said the initiative is a game-changer and that the Presidency is looking to expand BBBEE as a critical enabler of economic growth and social transformation. Read: President Ramaphosa appoints new BBBEE advisory council In 2023, South Africa will mark 20 years since the adoption of BEE legislation. Ramaphosa appointed 14 members to serve on his new BBBEE council last month. They will serve for a period of five years (effective 1 June). The president says the council will advise government and guide the course of BBBEE as the country recovers and rebuilds from “years of slow economic growth” and the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic. “It is our expectation that this council will assist us as government to enhance the implementation of BBBEE and associated policy such as the codes of good practice, the sector charters, and recent instruments like the Dtic’s [Department of Trade, Industry and Competition’s) Black Industrialists Programme and worker ownership requirements,” Ramaphosa added. He says the council will be responsible for: Ramaphosa indicated that Dtic Minister Ebrahim Patel will guide the council in putting its programme of work together. “With regards to BBBEE and employment equity, there has been substantial progress with regards to the representation of blacks and women in the workplace, including in senior management, in both the public and private sectors,” added the president. “At the same time, we know we are not as far as we hope to be, and that is why the work of this council will be critical.” Read:
Policy uncertainty, specifically in the BEE world
‘Economic transformation and economic growth are intertwined’
Women-owned petrochemicals group acquires bpSA’s East London terminal Ramaphosa says that the council assumes it duties at a challenging time, but believes it is up to the task. “Between you, you have a range of experience, from working in state-owned enterprises, to private companies, to SMMEs, to public procurement, to serving as regulators on BBBEE, competition and trade policy,” he told delegates attending the BBBEE Council meeting. “I have no doubt that [these] expertise will be brought to bear as you undertake your work, in collaboration with the department of trade, industry and competition and other departments.” Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.