Major retail outlet Makro has launched its first stand-alone shopping app which will enable customers to purchase merchandise, liquor, and pantry items, remotely. The Makro Shopping App, available to Apple and Android users, gives customers access to over 120 000 products, a 30% increase in the outlet’s online product range since January. This comes after its parent company Massmart announced that it would invest 72% of its capital expenditure budget in e-commerce on 7 March. Read: Massmart doubles down on everything but horror-show Game Massmart devotes majority of 2022 capex to new growth, amid persisting losses “We have secured access to Walmart’s global e-commerce technology stack and approved a three-year e-commerce investment plan that is heavily weighted towards creating an intuitive mobile-first online shopping experience,” it said. In a statement issued on Wednesday Massmart noted that Makro underwent an accelerated e-commerce transformation programme in recent months as part of Massmart’s strategy to become a leading omnichannel retailer in South Africa. Llewellyn Walters, Makro’s CEO, says the app was a natural progression following the growth of e-commerce on Makro’s website. “We were also greatly assisted by learnings from previous apps we have built in the Massmart group and the support of Walmart’s global tech team in Bangalore. India has been key to delivering this accelerated project,” he adds. Jean Ochse, who is responsible for Massmart’s mobile app development, says two improvements on the app include the search/discovery functionalities which make products easier to find and a 70% reduction in customer registration processes. “Our aim was to provide customers with the most seamless shopping experience ever, so that they feel as though they have their closest Makro in their pocket,” says Ochse. Walters adds that the app represents a significant step in Massmart’s e-commerce journey and that the retailer is looking forward to serving more customers through the platform. Massmart says its goal is to achieve a 50% to 65% growth in gross merchandise value each year for the next five years. This includes Makro’s 25% increase in store networks “from untapped market opportunities”, which is expected to generate between R5 billion and R7 billion of potential sales. Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.