KFC South Africa has opened a new restaurant in Pinelands, an affluent garden city suburb in the Western Cape, featuring advanced technology designed to facilitate a quicker and easier service. The store features digital menu boards in each of the drive-through dual lanes, a first for the food chain in Africa. It also has self-service kiosks for walk-in customers, a designated window for delivery drivers, digital menu boards and modern in-connect kitchen technology. In a statement issued on Wednesday, KFC South Africa indicated that the brand aims to make the corner of the parking lot in which it is built stand out, while being respectful to the existing structure through consultations with local architects. The outlet features digital menu boards in each of the drive-through dual lanes, a first for the food chain in Africa.. Image: Supplied “The restaurant is designed to be fresh and striking in appearance with a strong contrast in the dark grey vs the white, with strong pops of red and the warmth of wood to create a striking, attractive restaurant which compliments its context while being on-brand,” it adds. Thuthuka Nxumalo, KFC Africa’s chief operations officer says, “The sum of this design puts the power of ordering and food fulfillment in the hands of the customer as well as gives employees an opportunity to focus on the back of [the] house and getting food out quicker. This culminates in a superior customer experience.” Nxumalo notes that the restaurant business has changed and is moving into a new era of customer experience, which warrants a new approach to restaurants. He says this is driven by a shift in customer preferences and expectations of what brands should be delivering at present, whether in food, design or experience. Nxumalo indicated that the store created another avenue of employment for the local community, by employing 25 team members with capacity to employ at least another five from the local township community in Khayelitsha. KFC South Africa says as it expands its reach, it will continue its Add Hope programme which provides over 150 000 meals a month to children in need, to help combat hunger in the country. “After years of looking for a site within Pinelands we feel we have found the perfect location that provides ease of access to customers as well as delivers on our ability to showcase modern franchising, while placing the community at the heart of the build and success,” adds Nxumalo. Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.