Most Asian stocks dropped along with US equity futures Monday and the dollar jumped as the risk of more Covid curbs in China exacerbated overarching worries about the global economic outlook. An Asian equity gauge shed 1% amid declines in Hong Kong and China. Japan was a bright spot, buoyed by the prospect of administrative stability after the ruling coalition expanded its majority in an upper house election. A dollar gauge was back around the highest level since 2020. The yen was among the weakest Group-of-10 performers, possibly because investors viewed the poll result as an endorsement of Japan’s super-easy monetary policy. Shanghai reported its first case of the highly infectious BA.5 omicron sub-variant Sunday and warned of “very high” risks, stoking fears of more lockdowns given China remains wedded to stamping out the pathogen. Casino shares sapped Hong Kong after Macau said almost all businesses will close for a week due to a virus outbreak. Hong Kong’s tech index also slid. Commodity-linked currencies were under pressure and oil suffered losses. Treasuries were steady, leaving the US 10-year yield around 3.07%. Inversions along the yield curve are potential signs of economic retrenchment ahead.  Price pressures, a wave of monetary tightening and a slowing global economy continue to shadow markets. A US inflation reading later this week is expected to get closer to 9%, a fresh four-decade high, buttressing the Federal Reserve’s case for a jumbo July interest-rate hike. Company earnings, meanwhile, will shed light on recession fears that contributed to an $18 trillion first-half wipeout in global equities. “The real earnings hit will come in the second half as we’re hearing from companies, especially retailers, saying they’re already seeing weakness from consumers,” Ellen Lee, portfolio manager at Causeway Capital Management LLC, said on Bloomberg Television. Elsewhere, the pound fell as the race to replace Boris Johnson as UK premier heats up. Over in Europe, the main conduit for Russian gas goes down for 10-day maintenance on Monday. Germany and its allies are bracing for President Vladimir Putin to use the opportunity to cut off flows for good in retaliation for the West’s support of Ukraine following Russia’s invasion. The US consumer-price index data will be “the core driver of risk this week” and a 9% print is possible, which “should keep US bond yields headed higher,” Chris Weston, head of research at Pepperstone Group, wrote in a note. Bitcoin caught a downdraft from the cautious start to the week in global markets, falling as much as 2.6% but holding above $20 000. What to watch this week: Some of the main moves in markets: