Four years ago, Elon Musk first tweeted about a “roller skates & rock restaurant” that would double as a charging station for electric vehicles. Now Tesla Inc and its CEO have taken a step closer to making that reality. On May 19, the electric vehicle company submitted documents to the City of Los Angeles for a Tesla diner that would be open 24 hours a day on 7001 W. Santa Monica Blvd. in Hollywood. As first reported by Electrek, the 9 300-square-foot space includes plans for a drive-in movie theater and a 28 stall supercharging station. Architectural plans show a two-story diner with over 200 seats, both indoors and outside. The outdoor seats will have a direct view to two tall LED movie screens. Food will also reportedly be delivered to cars. Gonna put an old school drive-in, roller skates & rock restaurant at one of the new Tesla Supercharger locations in LA — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) January 7, 2018 Almost a year ago, Tesla filed applications with the US Patent and Trademark Office to trademark a ‘T’ logo for an array of restaurant concepts, from self service to take out. The original location of the Tesla restaurant was reported to be in Santa Monica, although that Supercharger location opened in February without any branded eating options. There are no further details on opening date or menus, and Tesla did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Plans for the Hollywood Supercharger restaurant must first be approved by the city. The design will reportedly be futuristic (no surprise) and would replace an outpost of the family friendly Shakey’s Pizza, a fixture in LA; the location is three blocks away from Danny Trejos’s “Trejos Coffee & Donuts,” which anchors an iconic Hollywood corner. Musk originally tweeted that the concept would be old-school drive-in, with roller skates. More recently he affirmed payment could be made in Dogecoin. And, of course, you can pay in Ðoge — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) February 19, 2022 Tesla’s stock has fallen 22% in the past month, for reasons ranging from Shanghai’s shutdown, Musk’s bid to buy Twitter, as well as sexual misconduct allegations against the world’s richest man.