A new landmark study is set to call out the most significant operational, regulatory and legislative challenges experienced by tax practitioners in South Africa with a view to improving the level of support provided by industry bodies and expediting often-onerous interactions with government tax agencies. Developed by Tax Consulting SA’s Professional Partner Network (PPN), the study invites tax practitioners, accounting practitioners, legal practitioners, wealth and asset management firms, and global advisory companies involved in all areas of tax to participate. The study will take the form of a comprehensive, industry-wide survey that will, for the first time, provide a voice to professionals in the South African taxation industry and identify concerns pertaining to the professional bodies with which they are registered, the earning of CPD points, adequate training via webinars and seminars, and continuous upskilling in complex service areas. “A survey of this magnitude serves as a starting point to rectifying many of the fiscal, administrative, service, and regulatory concerns of tax practitioners, who have never before been given a platform through which these can be expressed,” explains admitted attorney and Head of PPN Roxanna Naidoo. “These and various other concerns will be addressed in the survey, allowing for practitioners to air their challenges and propose solutions.” Another concerning issue consistently raised speaks to the South African Revenue Service’s (SARS’) competency and collection measures, including over-regulation and the complexities of ever-changing laws. “While there is a voice for taxpayers in South Africa, there is a need to create a platform for tax practitioners to air their grievances, identify which areas in the industry are lacking and, ultimately, lobby the relevant entities to ensure that change occurs,” she asserts. Focus areas of the survey include: How to participate in the study To ensure an enhanced understanding of the tax landscape, we invite all tax-related practitioners to participate in the survey and also invite you to send the survey on to other tax practitioners, professionals and anyone you believe can contribute. The survey will take less than 10 minutes to complete. The survey will be strictly confidential, and the overall results and findings will be shared with all participants. https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/PFW3L68 “We believe that this will be South Africa’s first credible survey for all registered tax practitioners in South Africa. The aim is to gain insight on the professional needs of tax practitioners in South Africa, as well as to create awareness around the concerns and issues in the taxation industry,” Naidoo says. Roxanna Naidoo, Admitted Attorney and Head of the Professional Partner Network at Tax Consulting SA.