JSE-listed infrastructure development and construction materials supply group Raubex has appointed Felicia Msiza as its new CEO, effective from August 1. Msiza will replace Rudolf Fourie who has been in the role for the last 12 years. The group says Fourie, who started at the company 25 years ago, will take on a new role as non-executive deputy chair, focusing on business strategy and mergers and acquisitions (M&A). Raubex chairperson Freddie Kenney says the company looks forward to retaining Fourie’s expertise with his new role on the board. The group also announced a board decision to create an executive chief operating officer (COO) position, which will be assumed by Dirk Lourens. “We are particularly pleased to have maintained our successful track-record of promoting from within the business and congratulate Felicia and Dirk on their promotions to CEO and COO respectively,” says Kenney. “We are confident that their unique and complementary skillsets are ideally suited as we embark on a new growth chapter and look forward to working closely with them,” he adds. Read: Raubex targets the renewable energy space Msiza, who joined the company in 2011 as an independent non-executive director and who was subsequently appointed as executive director in March 2017, is “thrilled” with her appointment as CEO. Msiza says the appointment builds on the company’s diversified business model. “We have a dynamic and well-established executive team in place that has learned a lot from Rudolf over the past decade, and I am excited at the opportunities that will come in terms of increasing tender activity, bedding down strategic partnerships and driving revenue streams across new growth markets in line with our strategy,” she adds. Rudolf Fourie, outgoing CEO of Raubex, will still be involved in the group, with a new non-executive role on its board. Image: Supplied According to Raubex, Msiza is experienced in ethics, strategy, risk, corporate governance and legal and compliance. Her previous roles include being chief audit executive at Denel SOC, director of risk and assurance at City Power SOC, head of internal audit at the Independent Development Trust, and partner and director at SizweNtsalubaGobodo VSP. Read: Sanral delays awarding tenders worth at least R16bn Msiza also served as non-executive director at Internal Auditors South Africa. She holds a Bachelor of Commerce (BCom) degree, a qualification in Tax Law, a Master of Business Administration (MBA) and is a certified Chartered Director (SA). Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.