The Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), in collaboration with independent global trading and investment company big xyt, has launched an equity data analytics platform where companies can access market and trading insights. The web-based service, according to the JSE, is highly accessible and does not require information technology (IT) integration or support by end users. The tool is anticipated to enable client-facing staff to discover granular information about their trading flows and identify competitive advantages. The platform enables firms to explore their market share, examine how they interact with the order book, and view their trading performance, according to a press release. Product managers can also use it to improve their algorithms and trading strategies. Targeted at traders, sales traders and senior business management, the platform will deliver data directly to JSE cash equity and exchange-traded fund (ETF) market participants. JSE director of information services Mark Randall says the platform is an opportunity for the exchange to help its member firms to promote their competitive advantages and unique selling propositions. “The increase in the quantity and complexity of data globally is a major challenge for our members and broader participants, both in terms of the cost of development and the delivery to end users,” he says. “We also know that every exchange has a unique dataset that helps participants to understand their competitive strengths, in terms of liquidity and trading quality. “We set ourselves the challenge to make this dataset highly accessible, at an affordable cost and with very fast delivery.” Richard Hills, head of client engagement at big xyt, says the initiative puts the JSE at the forefront of the global exchange community. “The JSE has raised the bar in terms of the scope and quality of information services provided to their stakeholders.” This follows the JSE’s recent amendments to its listing requirements, which include the easing of compliance regulations for listed companies. Under the new requirements, companies are expected to be able to raise capital more easily and perform more transactions without waiting for shareholders. The amendments were approved by the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) and will come into effect on June 1. Listen to this MoneywebNOW podcast with Simon Brown (or read the transcript here):  Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.