Register here. In a world where change is constant, we have to think differently. When people retire, they are faced with certain choices in deciding how best to use the money they accumulated in their retirement funds over their working career to provide them with a sustainable income in retirement. The available options haven’t changed much in many years – people can generally choose between a life annuity and a living annuity to provide them with a regular income. Momentum Investments however believes there is a better way for people, together with their financial advisor, to plan and structure their finances so that they can blend their need for certainty and flexibility in one retirement income solution. Join Moneyweb’s Ciaran Ryan in this webinar where he, together with guests Fareeya Adam and Martin Riekert of Momentum Investments, discuss how Momentum has reimagined retirement income planning and how the latest enhancements to one’s living annuity can enhance an investor’s outcome or an advisors’ value proposition to their clients. This webinar will take place on Tuesday, May 31, at 11am. You can register here. More about the guests: Fareeya Adam
Head of retail product Solutions at Momentum Investments Adam has been with Momentum for more than 16 years. She started as a student straight after university and has spent most of her time in product development roles, with a stint in the valuations team. She qualified as an actuary in 2005. In her current role, her team is responsible for product development and product management for discretionary and retirement solutions, traditional life annuities, structured products and the international products. Adam has a BCom Honours in Actuarial Science (University of Pretoria) and is a qualified actuary through the Institute of Actuaries (UK). Martin Riekert
Executive head of retail investments at Momentum Investments Riekert began in wealth product development as an actuarial analyst and started the wealth actuarial team that supported the wealth business from a technical and business intelligence perspective. He later moved to product development, focusing on the Momentum Retail savings products. Soon after the MMI (Momentum and Metropolitan) merger, he was promoted to head of the retirement solutions team, where he focused on retirement savings and preservation products, including the trustee governance function.In 2016, Riekert was promoted to head of all product development and product management activities for Momentum Investments. He became executive head of retail investments in 2020. Riekert is a qualified actuary (Fellow of the Actuarial Society of South Africa) and has a BSc Actuarial and Financial Mathematics (UP) as well as a post-graduate diploma in Actuarial Science (UCT).