Power utility Eskom implemented Stage 2 load shedding from 5pm on Monday, saying it will continue until 10pm, essentially during the evening peak. It says winter season demand for electricity has increased, placing further strain on an already unreliable grid. Read: Eskom is burning  more diesel than ever to keep the lights on According to Eskom, the failure of a unit each at Kriel, Grootvlei and Majuba power stations on Monday afternoon as well as the delay in returning several other generation units to the grid at Kusile, Matimba, Lethabo, Hendrina and Tutuka power stations, has added stress to the system and necessitated the implementation of the power cuts. The utility says it expects the capacity constraints to continue during evening peaks for the rest of the week. “The onset of winter has seen increased demand and this will lead to a constrained system, particularly during the morning and evening peaks, throughout the winter,” Eskom reiterated in its latest load shedding announcement. “We therefore urge all South Africans to continue using electricity sparingly especially between 05h00 – 09h00 in the mornings and 16h00 – 22h00 in the evenings.” The utility currently has 3 049 megawatts (MW) of capcacity out on planned maintenance while another 15 943MW  has been lost from the grid due to unplanned breakdowns. Executive resignation Eskom in a separate statement issued earlier on Monday, announced the resignation of group executive for generation, Phillip Dukashe, which will take effect at the end of May. Dukashe will leave the troubled power utility after 26 years of service. He said his departure is in order “to achieve a balance for the benefit of his health, family and work responsibilities”. Rhulani Mathebula, the utility’s head of generating units, will step in as acting group executive for generation while the utility looks to fill the position. Read: Load shedding crisis as Eskom breakdowns hit record levels “We salute Phillip for his rich legacy of selfless leadership, integrity and excellence in serving Eskom and the country for the past 26 years and for always standing up and doing what is right and honourable,” Eskom said in its statement. “Phillip’s vast institutional knowledge, cross functional skills and sound executive leadership experience created the much-needed stability in the Generation division during his tenure and achieved some significant strides in helping to turn around [the] generation unit’s poor performance since his permanent appointment into the position from April 2021.”